OSLO, Nov. 30 (Reuters)—Secretary of State Kissinger, in a letter to the Norwegian Nobel Prize Committee, announced tonight that he had established a $57,500 scholarship fund for children of American servicemen killed or missing in action in Indochina.
Unassisted except for crutches, Edward M. Kennedy Jr. left the Georgetown University Hospital yesterday and went home to McLean, Va. The 12‐year‐old son of the Democratic Senator from Massachusetts carried with him a football from the coach of the Washington Redskins, George Allen. Physicians at Georgetown amputated the youth's right leg Nov. 17 in the hope of arresting bone cancer. Teddy will spend the next several days at home catching up with is schoolwork. . . . In Los Angeles, Elizabeth Taylor was said to be “looking great and doing very well” in her recovery from surgery to remove an ovarian cyst and to correct an intestinal disorder. She is expected to he out of the hospital in a week. . . . And here in New York, W. Averell Harriman, the diplomat and former Governor, was discharged from Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center after a three‐day stay for undiclosed reasons. The 82‐year‐old Mr. Harriman was admitted Tuesday.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 30—Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger said today that the Administration would propose development of a new series of strategic weapons as insurance against the possible failure by the United States and the Soviet Union to agree to further limitation of their nuclear arsenals.
SHARON, Vt. — Very few people here have ?? to say about that small Asian country called Vietnam It does neat seem to ?? much that this ?? will he the first in ?? when American ?? are not fighting there.
PETALUMA, Calif., Dec. 2 —“Heroes are just ordinary people,” said Mrs. Beverly Penry, referring to her son, Richard A. Penry. He was awarded the Medal of Honor by President Nixon in June, 1971 for “conspicuous gallantry and extraordinary heroism” in Binh Tui Province in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON—Congress's recent overriding of President Nixon's war powers veto has been acclaimed as an “historic recapture” of the Congressional prerogative to declare war. But the opposite is true. After struggling for three years to re‐establish its primacy in the war‐making area, Congress has now legally relegated itself —unconstitutionally, in my opinion—to the secondary role it has sadly and mistakenly accepted in the contemporary era.
NHA BE, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 3—Communist gunners fired about 50 rounds rockets into the largest civilian gasoline storage area in the country here early this morning, creating a huge blaze and immediate gasoline shortages Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 3 — At least one third of South Vietnam's stock of gasoline for civilian use was reported destroyed early today by a rocket attack on a petroleum depot seven miles southeast of here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 4—The Saigon military spokesman announced today that South Vietnamese aircraft had flown 124 bombing sorties yesterday against Communist positions.
LAI KHE, South Vietnam—A thin young man in wrinkled green North Vietnamese Army fatigues folded and unfolded his hands as he sat and talked in the South Vietnamese division commander's office.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 5—North Vietnamese tanks and troops yesterday assaulted and seized a district capital in remote, mountainous Quang Duc Province, once again taking the offensive in a month‐old struggle for control of a key road system in the Central Highlands, the Saigon command announced this morning.
To the Editor: On behalf of the National Council of Senior Citizens, a nonpartisan, nationwide organization of older people's clubs, I wish to express disagreement with your Nov. 13 editorial on a pending cost‐of‐living increase in Social Security cash benefits.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 6—The South Vietnamese Government flew reinforcements yesterday into the encircled capital town of Quang Duc Province, where some of the fiercest fighting since the ??ary cease‐fire has occurred.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 6—In the last month, the fighting in South Vietnam has reached its fiercest levels since the January signing of the agreement for an ostensible cease‐fire, which has since been shattered.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 6 (Agence France‐Presse)—Ten months after the signing of the Vietnam cease‐fire accord, the official party newspaper, Nhan Dan, has called for action to combat the “dolce vita that is gradually rotting North Vietnamese society.”
WASHINGTON, Dec. 6—Secretary of State Kissinger said today that the United States had told Arab states that their oil embargo was “no longer appropriate” against this country given Washington's energetic efforts to get a Middle East peace settlement.
"Life as a work of art"—at least once a decade that ancient concept seduces some members of yet another generation, and inspires them to hash up their lives in the name of truth or beauty. Jim McBride's "David Holzman's Diary," a totally delightful satire on "the blubber about cinéma vérité," mocks those ghastly reels from the nineteen-sixties, when various film makers immortalized themselves or their friends by trying and failing to be spontaneous. "Diary," which derides directors who scorned imagination or invention while worshiping the camera, opened yesterday at the Whitney Museum of American Art.Holzman, an earnest young Godard-hound, decides to film his life in order to understand it—and only succeeds in ruining it. As a voyeur, a gentle intruder into other people's lives, he can't understand that the filming makes his subjects feel self-conscious, or that "reality" is altered by the presence of his camera and his tape recorder and his lavalier mike, which he calls his "friends."His girlfriend, who detests his movie-making, finally leaves him because of it. He's already told us in a dry, flat voice that he really loves her, though he can't resist pointing out that she's "dirty, sloppy." Forlornly, he adds, "I don't quite get her sense of privacy." After she's gone, he argues that masturbation is an improvement on the real thing because You can think of anything . . . pigs. Think of trains going in tunnels. Think of bagels. I mean, you're not limited to women."However, his obsession with freezing everything on celluloid rarely allows him any other fantasies. He gives manic attention to every detail of his New York neighborhood, from derelict sofas on the street to the installation of matchstick bamboo blinds in a nearby apartment, and finally gets slugged by a cop for filming people through their windows.Soon, we realize that the camera is his analyst. He tells it everything, and then grows furious because it doesn't answer him with "the right things," and also makes him "do things" that he wouldn't ordinarily do. Accusingly, he asks it, "What do you want?" Then he shouts at the lens that it hasn't helped him—just as a frustrated patient may denounce an all too silent psychiatrist."Diary" was made in 1967, and time has served it very well. We get a pungent flash on the past when a radio announces the numbers killed in the Newark riots, or refers to "the new Israel-Egyptian cease-fire," or quotes the Pentagon on the probable increase of American forces in Vietnam next year. But aside from politics, that period now seems a rather innocent one in retrospect, and the character of David Holzman (admirably played by L. M. Kit Carson) distills the eager naiveté that accompanied the zest for technology, deliberate inarticulation and the mistrust of words, the vibes and the hoaxes and all the lighter put-ons of 1967.At the end, Holzman is bitterly disappointed that his movie and his camera have taught him nothing — least of all how to control his life. The picture reminds me of the late A. J. Liebling's recollection of being 23 in Paris, when he felt that his life hinged on an impossible decision. Meanwhile, he was writing a novel about a 23-year-old in Paris whose future hung upon an insoluble choice. When the character caught up with the day of his own life that he was describing, he couldn't finish the book. Jim McBride's movie evokes the spirit of Liebling's enormous laughter when he remarked that few diaries yield conclusions or solutions.
TORONTO—The Senate Armed Services Committee and House Appropriations Committee hearings on the Pentagon budget until July 1974 are now out, and the traditionally diligent censors released alarming new information on the Nixon Administratioh's plans for Indochina.
HONG KONG, Dec. 7 (UPI)—North Vietnam charged today that the United States had stationed the aircraft carrier Midway off its coast and demanded it be withdrawn, the Chinese news agency Hsinhua reported.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Dec. 8—South Vietnamese infantry units last night retook a district capital in the Central Highlands that was overrun by North Vietnamese soldiers and tanks four days ago, the Saigon command announced.
News items: On Monday, rockets and mortars blew up a third of South Vietnam's gasoline supply in an attack near Saigon. On Wednesday, the North Vietnamese seized a district capital in Quang Duc Province. Friday, the South recaptured it. What happened to peace in Vietnam?
New York University has withdrawn $20,000 in annual scholarship funds for veterans of the war in Vietnam after only four people applied and only two enrolled in the first term that the funds were available.
I HAVE an acquaintance in New York City—a liberated American woman—who recently cut hér hair very short because, she explained, long hair is too attractive to men. The American male is a sexual imperialist, in her view, and she intends to keep him up against the wall from now on. This young woman is very eloquent, along the lines of current feminist dogma, when she explains the kitchenand‐family slavery of American women and speaks of how women are nothing hut sex objects for American men and how, ultimately, male oppression is somehow akin to the bombing of defenseless Vietnamese villages. She has harsh words for any male who refuses to see that American women are de slaves.
The issues change little from year to year, and so the talks that begin tomorrow in Brussels among the ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization will have a strong feeling of it‐happens‐every‐winter. But if the questions of United States troop strength in Europe and the nature of NATO strategy are, for all their seriousness, old‐hat, there are at least two issues that are not, and they will be high on the agenda:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec, 8 (UPI)—South and North Vietnamese forces battled for control of the Central Highlands district capital of Kien Duc today despite Saigon Government assertions that the town had already been recaptured from the Communists without a fight, field reports said.
LONDON, Dec. 8 — Leaders from London, Dublin and Belfast today continued their effort to reach agreement on plans for the future of Northern Ireland.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 8—For months President Nixon has been citing national security as the reason for authorizing establishment of the secret White House investigation unit known as the plumbers and as justification for restricting some aspects of the Watergate inquiry.
GIA NGHIA, South Vietnam, Dec. 9 (AP)—South Vietnamese troops, who were reported to have recaptured the strategic Central Highlands district capital of Kien Duc Friday, pulled back today and then made a fresh assault, reports from the field said.
There is a truly astonishing projection of 1984 about the Nobel Peace Prize in 1973. Orwell warned us that the dreadful day would come when war would be called peace and peace, war. The Nobel Peace Prize committee's homage to the “talents and goodwill” of Le Duc Tho and Henry Kissinger for their skillful negotiations lasting more than three years led us at the American Friends Service Committee to wonder if it should be called the “Nobel Negotiating Prize.” But Peace Prize?
STOCKHOLM, Dec. 10 (UPI) — Ten men cited for exploring new paths of knowledge received 1973 Nobel Prizes today and were honored at a formal tie ceremony for rendering the “greatest service to mankind during the preceding year.”
HOA LOI, South Vietnam, Dec. 7—The peasants here are being told that the sinuous one‐and‐a‐half‐mile gash they are digging in the earth is an irrigation canal.
To the Editor:
GIA NGHIA, South Vietnam, Dec. 10 (AP) — South Vietnamese troops advanced into the Communist‐held town of Kien Duc today, but North Vietnamese artillery and troops were massing nearby, military sources said.
Fourteen Vietnam veterans, many of whom directed traffic as military policemen, were assigned to duty at busy city intersections yesterday by the city's Traffic Department.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 11 —The House approved today by a vote of 362 to 54 legislation that would authorize the President to extend $2.2‐billion in emergency military aid to Israel to rebuild her forces in the wake of the October war.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 12—The Defense Department said today that it was drawing upon the nation's war reserves of oil in the Pacific to supply the South Vietnamese and Cambodian armed forces with their daily “minimum military requrements.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 12 (UPI)—The political leader of the Vietcong believes there has been no progress toward peace in Vietnam since the cease‐fire agreement was signed nearly 11 months ago and he blames the United States.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 13—Secretary of State Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, who negotiated the Vietnam cease‐fire, will meet in Paris next Thursday, the White House announced today.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 13—The Senate routinely approved today a $73.7‐billion defense appropriations bill that reduces aid to South Vietnam but leaves the Pentagon's weapons program virtually intact.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 13 (Reuters)—The International Commission for Control and Supervision resumed its peace‐monitoring function in South Vietnam today aftor nearly five months of inactivity.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 13—Secretary of State Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, who negotiated the Vietnam cease‐fire, will meet in Paris next Thursday, the White House announced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 13 — In almost a year since the signing of the Paris ceasefire agreement, the morale of many South Vietnamese fighting units appears to have sagged seriously.
WASHINGTON, Saturday, Dec. 15—The House passed an emergency energy bill early this morning after attaching to it a ban on petroleum shipments for military use in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Saturday, Dec. 15—One American soldier was killed and four were wounded this morning when Communist forces shot down a helicopter that was carrying them on a search for the remains of an American missing in South Vietnam since 1966.
WASHINGTON, Dec, 14 (UPI) —The Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved today the nomination of Robert S. Ingersoll, U.S. Ambassador to Japan, to be Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs.
HONG KONG, Dec. 14 (Reuters) — Le Due Tho of North Vietnam arrived in Peking today on his way to Paris for talks Thursday with Secretary, of State Kissinger, the Peking radio reported.
PRINCETON—Students at the Stuart Country Day School of the Sacred Heart here have sent paintings they completed to orphanages in South Vietnam to be displayed there.
Plans to honor the Rev. Daniel J. Berrigan with a peace award here have run into opposition following the report of a speech he gave recently to an Arab audience describing Israel as “a criminal Jewish community” and a “nightmare” that “manufactures human waste,”
WASHINGTON, Dec. 15—Unless President Nixon changes his mind at the last minute, the United States will end a year‐long diplomatic freeze against Sweden next month and name a new ambassador to Stockholm, American officials report.
AMMAN, Jordan, Dec. 15—A senior American official traveling with Secretary of State Kissinger's party said tonight that the Middle East peace conference in Geneva would. probably be delayed until Friday.
Four worried men, the President and three of his top aides, are in a helicopter flying from Los Angeles to San Clemente. The New York Times has just printed a secret Pentagon history of the Vietnam war, and the fear in the White House is that Daniel Ellsberg, the former Defense official who says he turned the documents over to the press, may give still more vital secrets, such as the American nuclear targeting plan, to the Russians. The four leaders discuss setting up an undercover operation, bypassing the F.B.I., to find out all about Mr. Ellsberg and stop all leaks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 15—The operations officer of the United States search team that came under attack in an area southwest of Saigon this morning said that the one American killed “was murdered in cold blood” as he held up his hands in surrender.
MOSCOW, Dec. 16 (Reuters) —The Soviet Union assured Le Duc Tho of “invariable support” for Hanoi's policies here today, Tass, the Soviet press agency, reported. Mr. Tho, a member of Hanoi's Politburo, arrived Pelting on his way to Paris for talks Thursday with Secretary of State Kissinger.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 16—For the first time since the Vietnam cease‐fire accord was signed last January, the United States today protested to the International Commission of Control and Supervision.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 17 (Reuters) — Filling stations in South Vietnam will operate only nine instead of 19 hours day to conserve dwindling fuel supplies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 17 (UPI)—A South Vietnamese military spokesman said today that 97 Communist soldiers had been killed by Government soldiers, backed lby artillery and planes, in heavy fighting in the Mekong Delta southwest of Saigon.
PARIS, Dec. 17—Le Duc Tho arrived here today for another round of Vietnam negotiations with Secretary of State Kissinger.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 18 (Reuters)—The United States and South Vietnamese delegations walked out of a meeting today of the joint military team looking for missing soldiers after flinging onto the conference table the bloodstained jacket of an American officer killed during a search last Saturday.
MOSCOW, Dec. 18—The Soviet Union, which has privately been pressing for a world gathBring of Communist parties, to day opened a conference of ranking party officials from its inner circle of allies in the Communist movement.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 18—One clear lesson of this extraordinary year is that strong nations and strong institutions within nations have more power than they dare use, but some people still haven't learned the lesson.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 18 (AP) — Senate‐House conferees agreed today on a $73.75‐billion defense appropriation bill. The total is $3.5‐billion below President Nixon's military budget for the year.
Somewhere in New York City today, two deserters are expected publicly to invite arrest, both facing possible three‐year prison sentences.
PARIS, Dec. 19—President Hafez al‐Assad of Syria told Secretary of State Kissinger in Damascus on Saturday that he could inform Israel that all Israeli prisoners held by Syria were being “well‐treated,” a senior American official said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 19 (UPI)—The only known American prisoner of the Vietcong was freed at a remote hamlet in the Mekong Delta today, two and a half months after he was captured in a Communist ambush.
MOSCOW, Dec. 19 — Ranking ideological specialists from nine countries Communist parties today concluded a private meeting that signaled a more co‐ordinated counterattack to Western pressures for freer human contacts and a freer flow of people and ideas as part of East‐West accommodation.
Secretary of State Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese chief negotiator, met for four and a half hours in Paris yesterday. They exchanged complaints about the ineffective Vietnam cease‐fire and agreed to keep in touch for possible meetings. Page 3.
Secretary of State Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese chief negotiator, met for four and a half hours In Paris yesterday. They exchanged complaints about the ineffective Vietnam cease‐fire and agreed to keep in touch for possible meetings. Page 3.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec, 20—Diplomatic sources said tolday that the Hungarian and Polish delegations to the International Commission of Control and Supervision had played a major role in helping persuade the Vietcong to release an American civilian captured Oct. 6.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 20—Premier Souvanna Phouma said today that the current meeting between Secretary of State Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam could lead to the imminent formation of a coalition government in Laos by the Royal Laotian Government and the Communist‐led Pathet Lao.
PARIS, Dec. 20—Secretary of State Kissinger arid North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho, met for four and a half hours today and exchanged complaints about the ineffective Vietnam cease‐fire. They also agreed to keep in touch for possible future meetings.
1. Vote on nomination of William B. Saxbe to be United States Attorney General. Nomination confirmed, 75 to 10, Dec. 17. 2. Vote on bill making appropriations for foreign aid, which passed, 55 to 31, Dec. 17. 3. Vote on motion to close debate on Rhodesian chrome ore bill, which required two‐thirds vote for passage. Motion passed, 63 to 26, Dec. 18. 4. Vote on conference report on bill banning importation of Rhodesian chrome ore, which passed, 54 to 37, Dec. 18.
The Rev. Donald S. Harrington said yesterday that he would not present a peace award to the Rev. Daniel Berrigan because of what he called his recent anti‐Israel and antiJewish address before an Arab audience.
MOSCOW, Dec. 21—The Soviet Union today disclosed an agreement to provide, a broad range of economic aid to the Communist‐led Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 21 (AP) —The conviction of Army Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. for the murder of at least 22 Vietnamese civilians at My Lai was upheld today by the United States Court of Military Appeals.
PARIS, Dec. 21 (Reuters)—The Vietcong today walked out of a negotiating session with South Vietnamese representatives in a fresh clash over South Vietmna's political future.
To the Editor:
For the premeditated murder of “not less than 22 Vietnamese” in the hamlet of My Lai in South Vietnam in 1968, Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. in 1971 was sentenced to life in prison. A few months later the sentence was reduced by the commander of the United States 3d Army to 20 years. Then, as Lieutenant Calley's lawyers appealed that sentence, President Nixon ordered the convicted man removed from the stockade and placed under loose house arrest at Fort Benning, Ga. Mr. Nixon said that when the appeals were exhausted, he personally would review the case. Last week, in answer to the appeal, the nation's highest military court, the United States Court of Military Appeals, upheld Lieutenant Calley's murder conviction and the 20‐year sentence. The next avenue of appeal is to the Secretary of the Army and then the fate of Lieutenant Calley, the only man convicted for what has become known as the My Lai massacre, will rest with President Nixon.
An assassins' bomb killed Spanish Premier Luis Carrero Blanco last week, eliminating the man who has been running the country on behalf of the durable but frail Generalissimo Franco and placing unexpected stress on the continuity of leadership.
GENEVA—If the, Arab‐Israeli conference is to accomplish its proclaimed goal of peace in the Middle East, there won't be a sign of any positive action for at least a month. Not that Israel's forthcoming elections and subsequent creation of a new Cabinet comprise the stumbling block; simply that complex modern negotiations take ages to progress. Vietnam is an example.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22—The United States expects the Suez Canal to open for traffic immediately after Israel and Egypt reach agreement on separating their troops currently confronting each other along the Canal, a senior American official said today.
BOSTON, Dec. 23 — How many Americans have remembered, at this seavon, what our country was doing at Christmas a year ago? We were carrying out the heaviest conventional bomytng campaign in the history of mankind, the B‐52 raids on Hanoi and Haiphong.
GENEVA, Dec. 23—Although they both opened with intensive behind‐the‐scenes diplomacy and a fuss about tables, the Middle East peace negotiations that have just begun here are bound to be profoundly different from the Vietnam conference, which ended with an ineffectual cease‐fire after more than four years of talks.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 24 —As Secretary of State Kissinger's Air Force jet headed home Saturday night from Geneva on the last leg of his 15‐day trip to 13 countries, the newsmen aboard were invited to his cabin up front for a farewell glass of champagne.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 24—The 93d Congress, which began its first session last Jan. 3 wondering what to do about impoundment, adjourned Saturday wondering what to do about impeachment.
CHARLESTON, W.Va., Dec. 24 (UPI) — An advertisement three inches deep by two columns wide, appeared ire today's issue of The Charleston Gazette. It read: “Thank you, President Nixon, for the first peacetime Christmas in twelve years.” It was signed: “Kanawha County Republican Women's Club.”
BAU CA, South Vietnam, —“The Poor and Miserable People of Quang Da Have Come Here to Survive.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 25 (UPI)—The South Vietnamese military command reported a slight drop in fighting today, but the battle level was still higher than during Christmas a year ago—a month before the cease‐fire went into effect.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 25 (UPI) —In what the Rev. Philip F. Berrigan called “our way of celebrating Christmas,” 37 protesters performed a medieval morality play in front of the White House today and said a mass that likened President Nixon to King Herod. Six persons were arrested.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 26 (AP)—A South Vietnamese helicopter gunship crashed south of Danang, killing all 12 persons aboard, the Saigon military command announced today. The crash was attributed to mechanical trouble.
BETHLEHEM, Pa., Dec. 25 (UPI)—A former prisoner of war said today that his first Christmas at home here in more than eight years was missing something—lights.
LAI KHE, South Vietnam, —Most of the time the 38‐year‐old lieutenant colonel is an intelligence officer in the South Vietnamese Army.
PARIS, Dec. 25—Henry A. Kissinger's first encounter with Europe as Secretary of State, at formal conferences, has left a new sense of his style and operating techniques among allies to whom he had promised “the Year of Europe.” It has been a rocky year in European‐American relations, and although there have been other, greater reasons, his approach to diplomacy has clearly contributed to the irritations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec., 27 (AP) — A Government battalion of 500 men was knocked out of aclion in fighting for control of the Mekong Delta rice harvest, Saigon military sources said today.
TOKYO. Dec. 26 (Reuters)—Japan's Toyo Petroleum Development Company said today that it would soon a negotiating team to Hanoi for further discussions with the North Vietnamese Government on oil exploration in the Gulf of Tonkin.
Phil Ochs appears singlehandedly to be trying to keep the protest song alive, if his Wednesday performance at Max's Kansas City, Park Avenue South at 17th Street, is to be judged. And in doing so he seems to be turning it (particularly the latter‐day variety) into a nostalgia form. His protestations, performed with guitar, range wide: bombing in Vietnam, right back to the Wobbly days (industrial Workers of the World) and the union martyr Joe Hill. Mr. Ochs turns Jesus into a Marxist with a fervent reading of Ewan MacColl's “Jesus Was a Working Man.”
The year that brought an end to the massive United States war effort in Vietnam brought no end to the doubts and tragedies that fell upon some twenty young men and their families far away. These men went to Southeast Asia voluntarily; they were unarmed—except for pencils, notebooks and cameras, the tools of their profession.
Cheese was quite thin. Even in a country of small, light people who do not become fat, Cheese seemed frail. But he was not. There is an Anierican living in the suburbs of Chicago who thinks of Cheek in Hanoi and wonders what he is doing. He is John A. Young, a former enlisted man in the Special Forces and a prisoner of war for five years in four different camps in North Vietnam. Cheese was a ranking Vietnamese political officer.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 39 (AP) — Heavy fighting broke out yesterday in South Vietnam's Central Highlands near the Cambodian border, after a lull of more than two weeks, the Saigon command said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 28—The people of Saigon, who once thought that there might be peace, are now being told that there is going to be much more war. Over their television sets and radios, they hear President Nguyen Van Thieu telling them in his blunt, unadorned Vietnamese that they must steel themselves for a Communist offensive.
To the Editor:
LEMOORE NAVAL AIR STATION, Calif., Dec. 29 (AP)—The family housing area at this Central California Navy base has been renamed “Alva??ez Village” in honor of the fighter Ipilot held captive in North Vietnam for almost nine years.
Far from defiant crowds chanting “Hell, no! We won't go!” and equally far from bright recruitment posters and manly patriotic urgings, it was in the still, uneasy backwaters of individual minds that the decision formed: to go, or not to go, to Vietnam. That is one revelation of these two very different books. Neither James Strahs nor Tim O'Brien thought the war was right, or wanted to fight it. That Strahs wound up fleeing the draft through a haze of England, Spain, India and Canada, while O'Brien succumbed to it and fought in the terrifying mine‐sown paddies of Pinkville, had by both men's accounts almost nothing to do with principle.
HONG KONG, June 30 (AP)—A severe drought has affected parts of North Vietnam and the “crop condition is very serious to critical” in five provinces south‐of Hanoi, North Vietnam's Communist party newspaper has retorted.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 30 (UPI)—Leaders of the International Commission of Control and Supervision agreed today to send high‐ranking military officials to coordinate the search for the two missing Canadian peace‐team members believed detained by the Vietcong.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 30—The South Viet‐namese have taken up roller skating.
A few weeks ago, a Norwegian who had served in the anti‐Nazi underground saw a newspaper photograph and thought he recognized an American O.S.S. officer he had worked with during the war and had known only as “No. 96.”
To the Editor:

DA NANG, South Vietnam, June 30—The teams searching for clues to the fate of the more than 1,300 Americans missing in action in Indochina have run into serious problems and their work has been painfully slow.
DOBBS FERRY, N.Y., July 1 (AP) — Mrs. Catherine Hellwig marched 10 more miles under a hot sun today on her trek from Buffalo to New York City to dramatize the plight of 1,300 American servicemen still listed as missing in action in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 1 (UPI)—The South Vietnamese command reported three Communist attacks today against Government units along Vietnam's central coast in what a Saigon spokesman said was the worst of weekend cease‐fire violations.
LONDON, July 1—Amnesty International today published a report on civilian prisoners in South Vietnam and called for urgent international pressure to obtain their release.
DENVER, July 1 (UPI) — An incomplete autopsy report indicates that Abel Larry Kavanaugh, former prisoner of war accused by a senior officer of collaborating with the enemy, committed suicide, according to a source within the coroner's office.
WASHINGTON, July 2 (UPI) —The highest court of military law turned down today at‘ tempts by attorneys for First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. to make the Government disclose any White House involvement in the investigation of the My, Lai slayings.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 2 (UPI)—The South Vietnamese Government has asked the chief Saigon correspondent for Asahi Shimbun, one of Japan's leading newspapers, to leave Vietnam because his paper carried an editorial saying Saigon was holding political prisoners.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 2 (Agence France‐Presse)—The North Vietnamese press said today that Hanoi had received word from the United States that it had completed minesweeping at the entrances to the ports of Haipong, Hon Gai and Cain Pha.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 2 (UPI) — Efforts were made twice today to obtain the release of two Canadian truce observers who disappeared Thursday and are believed to be in Vietcong hands.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 2 (Reuters) — The South Vietnamese Government said today that there were no political prisoners in its jails and that charges to the contrary were part of “a new campaign of intoxication” conducted by international Communism.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 2—Standing on the tarmac of the Phnom Penh airport is wrecked MIG‐17 jet fighter plane sent by the Russians to help Prince Norodom Sihanouk against neighboring Thailand and South Vietnam, allies of the United States.
WASHINGTON, July 3—The Army and the Navy dismissed charges today against seven enlisted men accused by an Air Force colonel of misconduct and collaborating with the enemy while they were held as prisoners of war by North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 3—A Vietnamese labor leader, arrested over two months ago along with five other union officials, has died in prison, Vietnamese and American sources said today.
OTTAWA, July 3 (Canadian Press)—The Vietcong have said they would help look for the two missing Canadian truce observers if Canada would declare that the men were not on iduty when they disappeared last Thursday, the External Affairs Department said today.

WASHINGTON, July 3—The Army and the Navy dismissed charges today against seven enlisted men accused by an Air Force colonel of misconduct and collaborating with the enemy while they were held as prisoners of war by North Vietnam.
If you were thinking of sending a wedding present to Prineess Anne and Lieut. Mark Philips, why, go right ahead. Ordinarily,, Britain's royalty spurns such gifts from strangers, but Buckingham Palace is rescinding the rule for the November wedding. Palace sources say every gift will be acknowledged and each will be seen personally by the bride and bridegroom. Naturally, everything will be screened by security employes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 2—The Saigon Government is greatly expanding its territorial control by moving tens of thousands of refugees into vast stretches of no man's land where the Vietcong have roamed freely for years.
The decision of the Army and Navy to dismiss misconduct charges against seven former prisoners of war is a wise and compassionate act, although tragically too late for an eighth accused enlisted man who took his life while awaiting the outcome of the Pentagon review.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 2—The Saigon Government is greatly expanding its territorial control by moving tens of thousands of refugees into vast stretches of no man's land where the Vietcong have roamed freely for years.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 4 (Reuters) — The Vietcong promised today to help look for the two Canadian truce observers who disappeared last Thursday while visiting an area about 40 miles northeast of Saigon.
WASHINGTON, July 4—The American Institute of Public Service announced today its first four awards for distinguished public service.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 4 (Reuters)—Three million dollars’ worth of what was believed to be almost pure heroin went up in a cloud of oily black smoke in a Saigon street today in the biggest public drug burning ever.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 5 (AP)—The Government today accused four labor leaden including one who died prison, of being Communis agents and said those alive Would stand trial in a few days
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, July 6—Agreement is near on a compromise formula to free two Canadian officers missing for a week in a Vietcong‐controlled rubber plantation east of Saigon, officials of the International Commision of Control and Supervision said yesterday.
PORTLAND, Ore., July 6 (UPI)—A former prisoner of war who was charged by a fellow prisoner with conspiracy admitted today that he voluntarily made antiwar broadcasts in captivity and said that he would “do it again.”
TOKYO, July 6 (Reuters)— Japan has asked North Vietnam to open negotiations on establishing diplomatic relations between the two countries, a Government spokesman said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6 (UPI)—The Saigon command said today that heavy fighting was continuing near the Central Highlands city of Kontum.

MIDDLEBURY, Conn., July 7—Dr. Charles L. Larkin Jr., a surgeon, and Mrs. Larkin have announced the engagement of their daughter, Miss Marian Russel Larkin, to Kimball Prince of Boston, son of Mr. and Mrs. Donough Prince of Francestown, N. H. A Sept. 15 wedding is planned. The prospective bridegroom, who served as a lieutenant in the Navy's special‐warfare group in Vietnam, is vice president of Sports Investors, Inc.
After years of trying, Congress has reasserted a measure of its war powers: President Nixon has promised to stop the bombing in Cambodia Aug. 15 and not to resume it unless authorized by Congress. The cut‐off date creates a strange situation.
Eighty‐five Vietnam veterans enrolled at the Art Students League here for up to two years will no longer be able to use their G.I. Bill benefits at the school under new regulations of the State Education Department that went into effect a week ago.

PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 7—The State Department has withdrawn the passport of a member of the press party that flew to Hanoi on March 29 to witness the release of the last group of American prisoners or war held by North Vietname. The passport of Le Lieu Browne was withdrawn last month and she was issued a temporary three‐month passport pending legal resolution of the case.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 7—An official search party today began looking for two Canadian officers missing for 10 days in a Vietcong‐controlled rubber plantation east of Saigon.


SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 8 (AP) — A twin‐engine South Vietnamese transport plane with 36 Vietnamese aboard crashed shortly after take‐off from Phu Quoc Island and plunged into the Gulf of Siam last night, the military command reported. Fourteen persons were missing.
HONG KONG, July 8 (Reuters)—A top‐level North Vietnamese Government delegation arrived in Peking today on its way to Moscow, Hsinhua, the Chinese press agency, reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 8—For those who like their rhetoric mixed with orange soda, the Vietcong's weekly news conference has become something of an institution here.

SAIGON South Vietnam, Monday, July 9 (Reuters)—The Vietcong acknowledged today that they are holding two Canadian Vietnam truce observers who have been missing for more than ID days.
WASHINGTON, July 9 (AP) —Senator Edward M. Brooke reports that a “human disaster of major proportions” is possible in Indochina without extensive outside relief.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9 (AP) — A Vietnamese Roman Catholic priest has charged in a complaint to the international peacekeeping commission that the South Vietnamese authorities tortured political prisoners after the ceasefire. He said their actions had led to 14 deaths and more than 500 injuries among inmates at Con Son, the island prison in the South China Sea.
WASHINGTON, July 9—The United States has run into difficulty in finding a suitable replacement for Canada on the four‐nation Vietman cease‐fire, commission and may have to propose a revamped two‐nation body if a substitute is not obtained by the end of the month, an Administration official said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9 — Negotiations for the release of two missing Canadian officers continued today after the Vietcong conceded this morning for the first time that they had been holding the men for 12 days in a remote area east of Saigon.
MOSCOW, July 9 (UPI) —Officials of North Vietnam's Communist party and Government leaders arrived today for their first official visit to the Soviet Union since the signing of the Vietnam peace agreement with the United States in January.
Plunging into the subject under discussion, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts went bobbing down the turbulent Colorado River. With him on the outing were his 11‐year‐old son, Teddy, and three fellow Democratic Congressmen—Senator John V. Tunney of California and Representatives Wayne Owens of Utah and William J. Green of Pennsylvania and their sons.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9—The American troops have gone, and now the businessmen are coming.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 9 (UPI)—Guerrillas armed with rifles, machine guns and rockets today ambushed a Mekong River supply convoy, setting an oil tanker ablaze. But the rest of the convoy managed to get to Phnom Penh with supplies from South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 10 (Reuters)—President Nguyen Van Thieu today announced sweeping changes in the organization of South Vietnam's civil service aimed at increasing its efficiency and stamping out corruption.
The terrace of Saigon's Hotel Continentale is one of the few constants in the capital's kaleidescopic physical and human landscape. In the late afternoon and on into the evening, the good and the evil sit cheek by jowl sipping and nibbling, buying and selling, drinking and brooding. The players change, but the cast is always the same—foreign soldiers, local hustlers, expatriate Frenchmen, world‐weary newsmen. Along the side and rear walls are the prostitutes—male, female and indeterminate. And shuffling around from table to table are the beggars and the pushers. The mood music is a melange of turned‐up rock, flatulent Honda, occasional siren.
LONDON, July 10—A Roman Catholic priest said today that he had received reports from Spanish missionaries in Mozambique of Portuguese Army massacres of Africans comparable to the My Lai killings in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 10 (UPI)—A search for the two missing Canadian truce obervers who disappeared in Communist‐held territory on June 28 was delayed again today by continued disputes between Canadian officials and Vietcong representatives.
WASHINGTON, July 10—John N. Mitchell swore today that he had deliberately withheld information from President Nixon about the Watergate bugging, the cover‐up and “White House horror stories” to prevent any damage to the President's bid for re‐election.
PALO ALTO, Calif., July 11 (Al') — The wife of the first prisoner of war to step off the first plane from Hanoi has filed for divorce. She is Joan Prof ilet, wife of Navy Capt. Leo Profilet. She cited irreconcilable differences in her petition, filed I yesterday in Santa Clara County Superior Court.
SAIGON, South Vietn.arn, July 11 (UPI)—The commander of American Army troops in the Pacific met today with President Nguyen Van Thieu wad Premier Tran Thien Khietrt. in talks that presumably included the forthcoming halt in American bombing of Cambodia.
PARIS, July 11 (UPI)—South Vietnam called on the Vitcong today to begin immediate secret talks on the country's political future patterned after earlier cease‐fire negotiations. The Communists refused, saying the proposal was an old American “gimmick.”
OCEANSIDE, Calif., July 11 (AP) — Lieut. Col. Edison W. Miller, a former prisoner of war who faces misconduct charges, was declared medically unfit for duty because of the injuries and the illness he suffered in confinement in a North Vietnamese prison, a Marine Corps spokesman said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11 (Reuters) — The international truce commission today put off another regularly scheduled meeting because two Canadian observers continued to be held in the Communistcontrolled area where they disappeared June 2R.
WASHINGTON, July 11 —The Senate gave overwhelming approval today to a resolution calling on the United States to take the lead in seeking an international agreement to prohibit “environmental warfare” such as past American rainmaking practices in Southeast Asia.
CANBERRA, Australia, July 11 (Reuters)—Australia will establish a diplomatic mission in North Vietnam later this month, the Department of Foreign Affairs announced here tonight.
WASHINGTON, July 12 (UPI) —Two more antiwar protesters were arrested at the White House today when they knelt to pray during a tour of the mansion, The arrests bring to 118 the number of persons detained since last Friday at the ‘White House for protesting the bombing in Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 12 (Reuters)—Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, Commander in Chief of Army Forces in the Pacific, today completed a three‐day visit to South Vietnam, where he has been assessing the military situation that has obtained since the cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 12—President Nguyen Van Thieu announced a Cabinet shuffle today that puts control over the Government even more firmly in his own hands.
WASHINGTON, July 13 — A complex series of electronic devices, similar in nature to the ill‐fated “McNamara line” in Vietnam, is being implanted along the 2,000‐mile border between the United States and Mexico and may be completed as early as mid‐1974, according to sources in the Border Patrol and Immigration and Naturalization Service.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 13—The boy crouched beside the motorbike, his greasy hands skillfully threading wires, tightening bolts, picking just the right wrench from the toolbox, assembling tiny parts with the dexterity of a surgeon. He worked with such concentration that nothing else seemed to exist for him on the busy Saigon streetcorner.
SAIGON Scuth Vietnam. Saturday July 14 — The Vietcong today canceled the schedWed re:tase c; two Canadian officers they ilave becn holding, over two weeks after announcing yesterday that the two men could be picked up this morning by an international recovery team.
The Columbia Broadcasting System announced late yesterday that it had rescheduled its previously postponed tion of David Rabe's ‘Sticks and Bones,” the award‐winning, Broadway play about the return of a blinded and embittered’ Vietnam war veteran, for day, Aug. 17, from 9 to 11
DENVER, July 14—The scene was the courtyard of a prison camp near Hanoi called Planiation Gardens, and the time was August, 1971. Eight young American enlisted men going to vash dishes passed a group of senior officers who were out shaving.
WASHINGTON, July 14—A former Washington chief of spy activity in Vietnam for the Central Intelligence Agency has charged that William E. Colby, President Nixon's nominee as the new C.I.A. director, slantedt intelligence data, submitted; misinformation and permittedi Amedican funds to be used in rigging a 1961 election in South Vietnam.
July 14— cidents that occur arc Laos has essentially liquidated her share of the Indochina war, despite the absence of any for‘mai settlement between the warring sides here during the last five months of negotiations. “Laos has shown the way,” only Cambodia and Vietnam would now copy the Laotian model, there would be peace,” he said. “All it takes is the will to stop killing.”
President Anwar Sadat, Supreme Commander, Premier, Military Governor, General, Chairman of the Arab Socialist Union (Egypt's only political party), has gone into his “operations room.” He has begun “the stage of total confrontation” against Israel. Through Newsweek he has warned the Americans: “The situation here—mark my words—will be worse than Vietnam. Because your vital interests are at stake.” “Battle committees” are deemed to be in permanent session throughout the country. Hundreds of young men are supposedly volunteering for duty in the newly formed “popular resistance forces.” Air‐raid shelters are being built.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 14—Canadian members of the International Commission of Control and Supervision held a lengthy meeting with Vietcong representatives today in an effort to reschedule the recovery of two Canadian officers who have been held captive for more than two weeks.
The U.S. and Mideast Oil
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, July I6—Two Canadian officers of the Internetional Commission of and Supervision, who had been held captive by the Vietcong for 17 days, were freed yesIerday and returned to by helicopter.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday„July, 16—Two Canadian officers were freed yesterday after having been held in the jungle for 17 days by the Vietcong and said they had been constantly interrogated, taken on forced marches, and, one of them charged, occasionally beaten while in detention.SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 15 — Nhan is nearly 3 years old, but she is too weak to stand on her spindly legs. She sleeps most of the day, lying half naked on the grimy concrete sidewalk, oblivious to the flies that cluster on the open sores covering her head.
WASHINGTON, July 15—Senator Harold E. Hughes said today that he had asked for expanded Armed Services Committee hearings into the conduct of the Vietnam air war.
ATLANTA, July 15 (UPI)—A former prisoner a war said today that eight American P.O.W.'s whose charges of collaboration with the enemy were dropped by the Pentagon caused the beatings of several of their fellow prisoners by the North Vietnamese.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 15 — Nhan is nearly 3 years old, but she is too weak to stand on her spindly legs. She sleeps most of the day, lying half naked on the grimy concrete sidewalk, oblivious to the flies that cluster on the open her head.
LONDON, July 15—”Torture during interrogation, or as a disciplinary measure within prisons, is no longer even motivated by a desire to gather ‘intelligence’ torture is widely used not only as an instrument of intimidation but as an end in itself in many instances torture has become no more or less than a matter of habit.” “prefer not to have ‘a dead body et the interrogation center. The torture that we see the results of most frequently is [attaching] electrical wires to people's toes, or fingers, or sensitive parts of their bodies.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 16—American, British, Dutch and Canadian oil inter ests won rights today to drill for oil off the coast of South Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 16—The two Canadian officers of the International Commis‐ sion of Control and Supervision, freed by the Vietcong yesterday after 17 days’ detention, have told their superiors in Saigon that they have “no doubt” that the Communists had orders to arrest and mistreat them as a way of harassing the Canadian delegation to the commission. 
MOSCOW, Tuesday, July 17 —A high‐level North Vietnam ese delegation has concluded an eight‐day visit to the Soviet Union with announcement of broad new Soviet economic aid for North Vietnam's postwar reconstruction.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 17 (AP)—The North Viet namese delegation to the joint military team investigating the missing in the Indochina. war !failed to attend a scheduled (meeting today, and the United States said this raised “serious questions about Hanoi's inten tions, 
LONDON, July 17 (Reuters). —Britain announced diplomatic recognition of North Vietnam today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 17 (AP)—Graham A. Mar tin arrived in Saigon today to take over as United States Am bassador. He succeeds Ells worth Bunker, who left May 11. Mr. Martin's arrival was held up by the United States Senate's delay in confirming him. 
WASHINGTON, July 17 — President Nixon ordered the Secret Service today to with hold from the Senate Water gate committee all information about secretly made recordings of the President's White House conversations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam. July 17 — After years of mutual scorn and bickering, South Vietnam and France have sud lenly become friendlier this summer, and the French are emerging once again as a major influence in their former colony. 
PARIS, July 17—France has decided to make a serious ef fort to restore her influence in Vietnam, building on Vestiges little noticed during the vast American presence. 
Body Count, by William Turner Huggett (Putnam, $7.95). A Marine platoon in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 18 —After much prodding by the United States, the South Viet namese Government has lent 20,000 tons of valuable rice to the embattled government of Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, July 18 (AP)1 ‐‐ The Pentagon today an nounced the end of United States minesweeping in North Vietnamese waters. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 18 (Reuters)—The Saigon Gov ernment said today that it and the Vietcong had reached agree ment in principle to exchange their remaining military and civilian prisoners next week. 
BOSTON, luly 18 (AP)—AF $15‐million extension to the Vietnam bonus bill gained initial approval in the Massa chusetts Senate today. The bill which could be reconsidered, would provide a $300 bonus for Vietnam veterans and $200 for those who served elsewhere, 
WASHINGTON—It was officially au thorized by act of Congress in August of 1964. It was known then as the Vietnam war. In 1970, when our forces went into Cambodia, it became known as the Indochina war. Now, by act of Congress, it has been authorized again —albeit for only 45 days—and it is called the Cambodian war.
THE BOMBING
LONG TIEN, South Viet nam, July 13—For the farm ers of this village in the Mekong Delta harvesting rice is still a risky business, as it has been for years.
WASHINGTON, July 19—The Senate Armed Services Com mittee said today that it would reopen public hearings tomor row to hear testimony against President Nixon's nomination of William E. Colby as the new Director of Central Intelligence.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 19—Michel Gauvin, head of the Canadian delegation to the International Commission of Control and Supervision, left Saigon today after having struggled for nearly six months to make the commission an ef fective peace‐keeping organiza tion.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 20 (AP)—South Vietnam today proposed for the first time that it and North Viet nam join the United Nations while awaiting reunification.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 20 (UPI)—The South Viet namese Government issued a 48‐page booklet today designed to refute news reports of poor conditions in the nation's pris ons, particularly the maximum security facility on Con Son Island.
PHILADELPHIA, July 20 (AP) — Two men robbed a Vietnam veteran on a disability of his $10,000 life savings after he drew it out of a bank here, the police said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, July 21 (Reuters) — A leading member of the Hoa Hao religious sect was assassinated yesterday as he was driving to the sect's headquarters at Chau Doc in the Mekong Delta, a spokesman for the group said today. Thai Ho Ngan, 53‐year‐ old deputy chairman of the Hoa Hao Central Council, was shot by “communist terrorists,” the spokesman said. 
WASHINGTON, July 20;— Senator John C. Stennis, chair man of the Armed Services Committee, said today that he had ordered a full‐scale re view of the laws governing the Central Intelligence Agency in light of the agency's secret ac tivities in Laos and its role in the Watergate scandal. 
The military services yester day were restrained for 10 days from issuing death notices to families of the 3,500 service men who are listed as missing in action in Indochina.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 21—Jacques Leslie, a correspondent here for The Los Angeles Times, has been ordered by the Government to leave South Vietnam. 
PHILADELPHIA, July 21 (AP) —Two men robbed a Vietnam veteran on a disability of his $10,000 life savings after he had taken them out of a bank here, the police said. Ronald Banks withdrew the money to deposit it in a bank closer to his home. As he left the bank, two men took him into an alley and seized the money, the po lice said. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 21 (UPI) —The Vietcong said today that they want the International Commission for Control and Supervision to re main a four‐nation body and are trying to find a replacement for Canada, which is withdraw ing at the end of this month. 
To the Editor:
0N the morning of June 13, 1971, the Sunday edition of The New York Times plunked down on door steps along the East Coast bearing a laconic headline at the top of Page 1: “Vietnam Archive: Penta gon Study Traces 3 Decades of Growing U.S. Involvement.” Inside were three more pages of stories and three pages of documents—the first installment of what were to become known as “The Pentagon Papers.” 
PHILADELPHIA, July 21 (AP) —Two men robbed a Vietnam veteran on a disability of his $10,000 life savings after he had taken them out of a bank here, the police said. Ronald Banks withdrew the money to deposit it in a bank closer to his home. As he left the bank, two men took him into an alley and seized the money, the po lice said. 
WASHINGTON—It always seems to begin with a letter, filled with con viction and misspellings. There was ex G.I. Ronald L. Ridenhour's description of My Lai 4. Then Airman Lonnie D. Franks told of Gen. John D. Lavelle's unauthorized bombings of North Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Ju ly 21 (AP)—South Vietnamese children are battling a tropical fever that attacks their blood streams. 
The seventeen‐day ordeal suffered by two Canadian truce supervisors at the hands of Vietcong captors South Vietnam is, as a senior Canadian officer put it, “an outrage beyond comprehension.” 
VIENTIANE, Laos, July 21 (UPI)—Communist Pathet Lao and North Vietnamese troops overran a valley area 115 miles southeast of Vientiane, where thousands of refugees have been settled, military sources said today. 
A Senate investigation into secret bombing raids Cambodia is beginning to unravel another sordid tale cover‐up by the Nixon Administration, of contempt for the truth, the law and the Constitution by military and civilian officials extending to the highest levels Government. 
SAIGON, July 22 (UPI)— Fermin Arraiza, deputy general secretary of the Puerto Rican Socialist Party, arrived in Hanoi yesterday, North Viet nam's VNA press agency said today in a broadcast monitored in Saigon. Mr. Arraiza is visit ing North Vietnam at the in vitation of a political organiza tion, VNA said. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, July 23 (AP)—One of South Vietnam's most promi nent national officials in the late nineteen‐sixties was report edly taken to Bien Hoa today to be released to the Vietcong as civilian prisoner exchanges were being resumed after two‐month delay. 
The leaders of every Prot estant denomination in the country have been treated as “enemies” by the White House for the last three years, one of those leaders contended yes terday. 
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 22 (UPI)—American war planes, including B‐52 bombers, struck guerrilla positions on all sides of Phnom Penh today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, july, 22 (AP)—The leader of a Cana dian truce team said today that interrogation of six North Viet namese prisoners disclosed in filtration into Cambodia and South Vietnam as late as June. 
BIEN HOA, South Vietnam, July 23 — The prisoners came in the early morning, crowded into the backs of more than score of army trucks: feeble men, defiant men, proud wo men, defeated women, young girls, mothers clutching babies. 
PARIS, July 23 (UPI)—The United States and North Viet nam announced today that their latest round of talks on aid had produced no final results and that the talks were being suspended tempo rarily. 
WASHINGTON, July 23—Sen ator Stuart Symington, acting chairman of the Armed Services Committee, declared today that $145 ‐ million appropriated by Congress to pay for the secret B‐52 bombing of Cambodia may have been obtained under “false pretenses.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 23—A correspondent for The Los Angeles Times was expelled from South Vietnam today. 
Representative Bertram L. Po dell of Brooklyn pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that he had accepted $41,350 in bribes to try to obtain an air route to the Bahamas for a Florida airline. 
MY DUC, South Vietnam—The fre netic bustle of Brooklyn is a world away from a small isolated agricultural village in South Vietnam's Mekong Delta. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 23 (Reuters) — President Nguyen Van Thieu has called for an economic blockade of the areas of South Vietnam con trolled by the Vietcong. 
WASHINGTON, July 24 — Secretary of State William P. Rogers, who participated in the decision to begin the secret bombing of Cambodia in March, 1969, repeatedly assured the Senate Foreign Relations com mittee more than a year later that the United States was do ing nothing to violate Cam bodian neutrality, excerpts from his classified testimony showed today. 
WASHINGTON, July 24 (AP) —An Air Force major who spent nearly five years in North Vietnamese captivity filed new mutiny charges today against seven Army and Marine enlist ed men who recently were cleared of other misconduct allegations. 
SAIGON. South Vietnam, July 24—Saigon is a city of illusions and images that often mask the scars of war. 
WASHINGTON, July 24 (AP) — The House decided today to stick by a proposal to prohibit aid to North Vietnam under the Food‐for‐Peace program as it voted to send the farm and food stamp bill to a compro mise conference with the Sen ate. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 24 (Reuters) — The prisoner exchanges in South Vietnam ran into new trouble today, four days before the deadline for completion laid down last month in talks at Paris. 

A Federal District Court Judge in Brooklyn ruled yester day that the Government must halt the American bombing of Cambodia on the ground that it is “unauthorized and unlaw ful.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 25—The Government tried but failed to turn over Tran Ngoc Chau, a former legislator and friend of many American advisers, to the Vietcong on Monday, according to sources familiar with the case. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 26 (UPI)—Charges of truce violations were made today by North Vietnam against the United States and by the Gov ernment in Saigon against the Vietcong. 
KWEILIN, China — A high level decision to broaden the scope of life for foreigners in China, coupled with the end of the war in Vietnam, has re sulted in the reopening of this ancient city to foreign visitors. It has long been celebrated as the site of the best mountain and river scenery in this land of mountains and rivers. 
Two men of deep experi ence, racial and war, speak with impressive and contrast ing conviction in a half‐hour documentary “news special” at 9 tonight over the Ameri can Broadcasting Company. See this program and listen sharply. The title is “P.O.W.'s: The Black Homecoming.” 
Replying to Senator Baker's ques tion, Herbert Porter of the Committee to Re‐Elect the President, said that he had not spoken up against his bosses’ wrongdoings “probably because of the fear of group pressure that would ensue, of not being a team player.” He went on to explain that loyalty to the President and his team had taken precedence rover loyalty to principles or to country. 
WASHINGTON, July 26—A former Green Beret sergeant accused the Pentagon today of continuing to cover up the ex tent of secret United States military operations in Laos and Cambodia. He also charged that Government officials had deliberately understated the number of Americans killed on those operations. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, July 27 — The scheduled visit to Thailand by President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam next week has been postponed indefinitely, apparently as a result of cooling in relations between the two countries. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 27—A former army officer and legislator who was jailed four years ago after he advocated negotiations to end the war has been told that before he can be released from prison he must publicly confess Commu nist ties and renounce them. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 27 (Reuters)—The South Viet‐’ namese command reported to day that Government and Com munist troops fought one of their most intense battle in months north of Saigon yester day. 
MOSCOW, July 27—Leonid I. Brezhnev flew to the Crimea today amid mounting indica tions that the Communist party leaders of Eastern Europe, Mongolia and pos sibly North Vietnam are gath ering for a meeting there to review the Soviet leader's latest personal diplomacy in the West. 
WASHINGTON, July 27 (AP) —secretary of the Army How ard H. Callaway said today that Army enlisted men had no legal obligation to obey orders from Air Force officers in North Vietnamese prison camps. 
OTTAWA, July 27 (Canadian Press) — Canada's External Af fairs Minister said today that two Canadians held prisoner by the Vietcong in South Viet nam had been treated as ene mies or spies even though it was clearly understood that they were members of the In ternational Commission of Con trol and Supervision. 
WASHINGTON, July 27 (UPI) — The United States will be allowed to recover the bodies of 23 Americans who died as prisoners of war and were buried just out side Hanoi. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 27—Thanks to American aid, South Vietnam has avoided the shortages of gasoline and scrap steel that have plagued the United States. 
MOSCOW, July 28—The So viet. Union has publicly as sured its allies and friendly neutrals that the burgeoning Soviet‐American accommoda tion and economic cooperation will not jeopardize their inter ests. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 28—The Paris agreement may not have brought peace to Vietnam, but it is suc ceeding all too well for Air Vietnam, the overworked lit tle airline that for years provided the only safe way to get to many of the coun try's isolated towns.
To THE EDITOR:
SAIGON, July 28 (UPI)— North Vietnamese and South Vietnamese troops today fought for the third day in a row northeast of Saigon. 
WASHINGTON, July 29 (UPI) —The United States appealed again today to North Vietnam for swift help in determining the fate of more than 1,300 Americans still listed as miss ing in Southeast Asia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 29 —The International Commission of Control and Supervision is bankrupt and has accumulated debts of over $10‐million, authoritative com mission sources say. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 29 — The International Commission of Control and Supervision is bankrupt and has accumulated debts of over $10‐million, authoritative com mission sources say. 
GAINESVILLE, Fla., July 29 (AP)—Seven members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War and a sympathizer, known as the Gainesville Eight, will go on trial Tuesday on con spiracy charges, accused of plotting to disrupt the 1972 Republican National Convention with violence. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 29 (AP) — Rocket and mortar attacks killed at least 15 gov ernment soldiers in scattered fighting during the 30‐hour period ended at noon today, the Saigon command said. 
LONDON — British policymakers have turned in a more European direc tion because of the changing position in the United States itself. Embroil ment in Vietnam and the divisive effect of this at home, superimposed on what must in any event have been a period of mounting social tension, have made the United States a more difficult country with which to be involved in a relationship of intense intimacy. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, July 31 (UP1)—The Vietnam international peace keeping team will come to virtual standstill with the de parture of Canada, according to the chief Hungarian delegate. 
VI THANH, South Vietnam, July 24—Six months after the signing of the Vietnam truce, the war goes on here in the heart of the Mekong Delta. 
The Vietnamese are indeed the political footballs Frances FitzGerald lucidly analyzes them to be in her May 4 Op‐Ed article on the Mylai refugees in Quang Ngai Province. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 31 (AP) — The Vietnam peace‐keeping commission ad journed indefinitely today after a d?? over procedure, sus pending meetings of chiefs of delegations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 1—The United States believes that the pros pects for a cease‐fire in Cam bodia are “very sunny,” well informed South Vietnamese of ficials said last night. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 1—The United States believes that the pros pects for a cease‐fire in Cam bodia are “very sunny,” well informed South Vietnamese of ficials said last night. 
WASHINGTON, June 1 (AP) —The Pentagon's health chief said today that all returned Vietnam War prisoners would be counseled and watched for five years to avoid the high violent death rates among for mer American P.O.W.'s after World War II and the Korean War. 
DALLAS, June 1 (AP)—More than 400 former prisoners of war were honored at a parade and banquet here today in the largest and most expensive homecoming rally since their return from Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, June 1—The chairman of the House Appro priations Committee, who will be a key figure when a Senate House conference tries next week to reconcile differing leg islation to curb the bombing in Cambodia, said today that he favored giving the Nixon Ad ministration “a litle more time” to try to achieve a cease‐fire. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 1 (Reuters)—Explosions ripped through a huge ammu nition dump near here today, killing one soldier and wound ing 13. Unconfirmed reports reports said the blasts were the work of Vietcong sabotage teams. 
Prof. John M. Darley of Princeton University has won a grant of nearly $30,000 to study the effectiveness of a system he uses in his social psychology lecture course to keep students abreast of each week's required reading. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 2—The South Vietnamese soldier in camouflage fatigue uniform stood casually in the middle of Route 1 near Bong Son, a town on the Central Coast, waving his M‐16 rifle at an approaching truck, Cautious ly the driver backed to a halt and after a brief discussion handed out some money.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 2 (Reuters) — The South Vietnamese Government ac cused the Communists today of blowing up one of the coun try's biggest ammunition dumps, which was destroyed in a series of explosions that rocked Saigon yesterday.
LOS ANGELES, June 2 (UPI) — A living memorial to the 6,000 Californians killed in Vietnam will rise over the cen turies in the Angeles National Forest.
SAN DIEGO, June 2 (AP)— The North Vietnamese captors of American servicemen were adamant. No writing on the pri son walls. No noise. No dis courtesy to the guards.
Only five days after President Nixon threw a joyous red, white and blue gala banquet to heap honor on the 600 or so men who made it back from enemy prison camps in Indochina, the facade of heroic endurance began to crack.
WASHINGTON, June 2—Sen ator Edward M. Kennedy, Dem ocrat of Massachusetts, said to day that officials in the United States Embassy in Saigon and in the State Department were blocking efforts to aid children in Vietnam who were victims of the war.
PENSACOLA, Fla., June 2 (AP)—A Federal judge has re fused to dismiss an indictment against seven members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War and a sympathizer accused of conspiring to disrupt the 1972 Republican National Con vention.
LANCASTER, Pa., June 2 (AP)—Mrs. Linda Smith said yesterday that she had “near ly fainted; everything Just went black” when she mis took President Nixon for a waiter during the White House reception for repatri ated prisoners of war on May 24. She attended with her husband, Donald G. Smith of nearby Ephrata, who was re leased by the Viet Cong on New Year's Day, 1969.
WASHINGTON, June 2 — Civil rights and antiwar leaders have joined with the People's Coalition for Peace and Justice and announced plans for a June 16 “march from Water gate to justice” with the theme “funds for life, not death.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 3 (UPI)—The Vietcong's Provi sional Revolutionary Govern ment has established diplomatic relations with 32 nations, Ha noi's press agency said today.
Capt. Edward A. Brudno of the Air Force, who spent more than seven of his 33 years in a North Vietnamese prisoner‐of war camp, was found dead yes terday in the home of his wife's family in Harrison, N.Y., appar ently a suicide.
An Air Force captain, freed from a North Vietnamese prison camp last February after seven years in captivity, was found dead yesterday in Harrison, N. Y., apparently a suicide. Pentagon officials said the death of the man, Capt. Edward A. Brudno, was the first suicide among re leased American prisoners of war. Details, Page 7.
An Air Force captain, freed from a North Vietnamese prison camp last February after seven years in captivity, was found dead yesterday in Harrison, N. Y., apparently a suicide. Pentagon officials said the death of the man, Capt. Edward A. Brudno, was the first suicide among re leased American prisoners of war. Details, Page 7.
VIENNA, June 3 (Reuters)— The Hungarian Communist party newspaper, Nepszabadsag, said today that Canada's de cision to leave the International Commission of Control and Supervision in South Vietnam was regrettable but that the departure “is not tragic and replacing her will certainly not be difficult.” Hungary is a mem ber of the truce group along with Indonesia and Poland.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, June 4 (AP)—A South Vietnamese helicopter was shot down yesterday by a Soviet made heat‐seeking missile north of Tay Ninh, 55 miles north west of Saigon, military sources reported today. All six crew men were killed.
DALLAS, June 3 (UPI)—A cheering crowd expressed ap preciation to the servicemen who fought in Vietnam. The servicemen reciprocated by praising the crowd.
Before the Democrats begin to sali vate in contemplation of the 1976 Presidential elections, I suggest that they recall the historical ability of Republican administrations to ride out the most sordid of past scandals in volving the Executive Branch of the Government.
Canada's decision to withdraw its cease‐fire observers from Vietnam is understandable, but regrettable. The great Canadian contribution in Vietnam these past months has been an activist determination to contribute as much as poisible to help end the fighting. But, as the chief Canadian delegate put it: “We came here to super vise a cease‐fire. In fact what we have been doing is observing a war.”
WASHINGTON, June 4— Henry A. Kissinger will be ac companied by Ronald L. Ziegler, the White House press secretary, when he flies to Paris tomorrow to resume talks with Mr. Tho's deputy, Tho, Hanoi's thief negotiator, on strengthening the Vietnam cease ‐ fire agreement, the White House said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 4 (AP)—A South Vietna mese Government spokesman said today that Columbia Uni versity should forward its in vitation for a teaching chair for Mrs. Ngo Ba Thanh either to North Vietnam or the Viet cong because she would soon be released to the Communists.
Review Denied in Flag Defiling
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 4 (AP)—A United States military team has found the re mains of an American pilot whose plane crashed eight years ago in South Vietnam, a United States Embassy source reported today.
PEKING, June 4 (Reuters)— Premier Chou En‐lai of China demanded tonight that the Uni ted States stop, bombing Cam bodia and otherwise end its military activity there. Mr. Chou said that no, interference in Indochina, under whatever pretext and in whatever form, would be tolerated.
WASHINGTON, June 4 (AP) —The Defense Department re ports that 10,303 American servicemen died of noncombat causes in Vietnam, in addition to the 45,958 men who were combat casualties.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 4 (AP)—A former South Vietnamese President today proposed the scrapping of all laws oppressive to non‐Com munist opponents of the Saigon Government. He also called for the immediate release of all po litical prisoners.
WHITE PLAINS, June 4—The Air Force began in investiga tion today into the death of Capt. Edward A, Brudno, the first apparent suicide of a for mer captive in the war in Indo china. 
HOAI TAN, South Viet nam—After a year as refu gees, the people of this dev astated central Vietnam vil lage returned home recently under Government prodding. But now they wish they had stayed in their safe if squalid refugee camp.
WASHINGTON, June 4—Be cause of Congressional absen teeism, the appointment of a Senate‐House conference com mittee to reconcile bills curbing funds for bombing in Cambodia was delayed today by at least a day. 
MANILA, June 5 (AP) — The United States Navy announced today that it would open courts‐martial proceedings to morrow in the cases of 11 men charged with going on strike on a vessel doing minesweep ing off North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, June 5—John D. Ehrlichman, President Nix on's former chief domestic ad viser, authorized a series of es pionage missions and at least two previously undisclosed il legal wiretaps beginning in 1969 that were carried out by an ad hoc White House intelli gence group, officials knowl edgeable about the Watergate investigation said today. 
WASHINGTON, June 5—The House Ways and Means Coan ??nittee agreed today to a tem ??orary extension of the $465‐ million statutory debt ceiling, ejecting for now the increase ?? $20 billion that had been re ??iuested by the Administration. 
PARIS, June 5 (AP)—Henry A. Kissinger arrived in Paris to night for his latest round of talks with Le Due Tho on how to make the Vietnam peace agreement work. 
WASHINGTON, June 5 — Senate‐House conferees today began trying to reconcile dif fering appropriations bill con taining provisions curbing funds for the bombing in Cam bodia, but they put off further action until Monday. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, June 6 (AP)—Gov ernment troops beat back a Vietcong and North Viet namese attack in the Mekong Delta, the Saigon command said today. It was the third day of some of the heaviest action since the cease‐fire. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, June 6 (AP) — The South Vietnamese Gov ernment said today that it asked Japan to replace Can ada as a member of the in ternational truce commission but that Japan declined. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 5—Concerned by a recent series of visits to South Viet nam by senior American mili tary officers, the United States Embassy has issued a directive strictly limiting the number who may enter the country, in formed sources said today. 
MANILA, June 7—A special court‐martial at Subic Naval Base, 80 miles northwest of here, today sentenced an Amer ican Navy man to three months at hard labor for having re fused to obey orders during a minesweeping operation off North Vietnam in March.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 6 (AP)—American and South Vietnamese officials boycotted a party tonight marking the fourth anni versary of the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, June 7 (AP)—A se ries of shelling and infantry attacks was reported along the central coast yesterday, and the Saigon command and the Viet cong blamed each other for the continued fighting in the Me kong Delta.
BANGKOK, Thailand—While Europe basks in the sun of détente and, in the United States, people breathe more easily after the rapprochement with the People's Republic of China and im proved Soviet relations—developments which led to the halt of hostilities in Vietnam — Thailand still remains bogged down, neck‐deep, in the cold war quagmire because of a massive American military presence and un warranted use of Thai territory for war operations in Indochina.
PARIS, June 6—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Due Tho of North Vietnam resumed their private talks today on how to enforce the Vietnam peace agreement signed Jan. 27.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 8 — The Saigon Government said this morning that it would not sign any new appeal to carry out the Vietnam peace agreement that was put Forward by the United States and North Vietnam.
PARIS, June 7— — Henry A. Kissinger and Le Due Tho continued their discussions to day in a meeting that had been postponed for several hours at Ithe American's request.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 8 (AP)—Govern ment forces killed 16 Vietcong on the fifth consecutive day of fighting in the Mekong Delta, the Saigon command said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 8 — A senior spokesman for the Sa;gon Gov ernment denied today that South Vietnam had refused to sign any new appeal to carry out the Vietnam peace agree ment that may be put forward in Paris by the United States and North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 8 (AP) —The Food and Drug Admin istration alerted consumers today to watch for contain ers labeled as epsom salts that in fact contain a chem ical that could kill children and people with heart trouble. 
MANILA, June 8—The United States Navy sentenced four more men today for disobeying superiors and refusing to do their duties aboard the amphib ious transport ship Ogden on March 30 during a minesweep ing operation off North Viet nam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 8 (AP)—A man identified as a North Vietnamese junior officer who said he had de fected to South Vietnam said today he had been ordered to attack international peacekeep ing planes and convoys investi‐ gating alleged Communist vio lations.
QUINCY, Mass., June 8 (AP)—About 300 persons at tended funeral services for Capt. Edward A. Brudno of the Air Force, the first re turned Vietnam prisoner of war to die. He was carried to his grave by other former P.O.W.'s today, five days after he committed suicide. 
Prime Minister Heath of Britain has accepted an in vitation to visit China, ac cording to diplomatic sources in London. The invitation was reportedly extended by For eign Minister Chi Peng‐fel of China, who is in London for talks with Mr. Heath and other officials. The date of the Prime Minister's visit is expected to be set later, If Mr. Heath goes to Peking, he will be the first British Prime Minister to have done so since the Communists took control of China in 1949. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 8 (AP) — South Vietnam has invited the International teague of Red Cross Societies to visit its civilian prison camps, the Government news agency, Vietnam Press, report ed today. 
PARIS, June 8—An Ameri can official said tonight that Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam are ex pected to issue a joint com muniqué this weekend, pos sibly tomorrow, on how the Vietnam cease‐fire accords can be enforced. 
LONG TRACH, South Vietnam, June 7—The coolie who hauls rice sacks for the local mill voted in the vil lage council election here, but he does not know whom he voted for. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, June 9 (Reuters))—A fire on board a United States Air Force C‐130 aircraft flying a regular liaison flight between Hanoi and Saigon injured seven people yesterday, an American Embassy spokesman said. 
WASHINGTON, June 9 (UPI) —Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, command veteran of the Ko rean and Vietnam wars, has been selected as the new Army Vice Chief of Staff, The Wash ington Star ‐News reported today.
WASHINGTON—They looked fit and certainly happy as they got off the medical evacuation planes from Hanoi earlier this year. But the ap pearances were sometimes decep tive.
To the Editor: Your editorial of May 30 entitled “The President as Witness” argues that the President cannot be subpoe naed to testify before a grand jury or in a trial “because of obvious potenti alities for politically motivated abuse” by prosecutors or others who may be acting irresponsibly. I believe your reasoning is at least highly debatable, if not wrong outright.
LOS ANGELES. On Feb. 17, Capt. Harry Jenkins stepped off a plane at the Alameda Naval Air Sta tion, one of the first flights of returning former prisoners of war to the United States. Captain Jenkins had been a P.O.W. for more than seven years, and as the senior man on the trip he moved to a microphone to address the crowd of about 500 cheering well‐wishers. A teen‐ager broke through the lines carrying his 2‐year‐old brother. The child, looking a bit confused, handed Captain Jenkins box of Valentine's Day candy. Then the naval of ficer spoke: “As we boarded the aircraft at Clark Air Force Base, a young girl gave me a huge sign which read, ‘Waiting sure takes a lot of patience. Out there, our patience sometimes faltered but our faith never did—in our God, our families and our country.”
The saying used to be that if a boy didn't need kill his father figuratively in order to become man, at least his first step toward manhood would mean a boot in his father's face. But this is not quite the case any more, for the simple reason that suicide has become so prevalent: the suicide of the Nixon kitchen Cabinet, for example, which in ferentially has taken with it whole globs of the na tion's rich and influential. Before that, there was the suicide in Vietnam of an entire generation of mainstream leaders of the Democrats and the view point they represented. (Recently the custom has been to speak only of the suicide of the Democratic party's left, but much more stunning in its effect on the country was the catastrophic misjudgment the centrist figures, the best of whom, if they are not dead, are now doing good works at such insti tutions as the Ford Foundation or Yale, rather like Profumo doing in his South London slums.)
PARIS, June 9—Henry A, Kissinger and Le Duc Tho today broke off their latest round of talks on how to strengthen the Vietnam peace accords. They did not sign. a draft document that was expected to be re leased this weekend.
HONG KONG, June 9 (UPI)—China and North Vietnam have signed an agreement under which China will supply eco nomic and military assistance to Hanoi in 1974, Hsinhua, the Chinese press agency, has re ported.
Funeral in Hue
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 10—Fighting in South Vietnam surged to its highest level since mid‐Febru ary yesterday and both the Saigon Government and the Communists appeared to be jockeying for more territory.
Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of Hanoi broke off their latest round of talks in Paris on how to strengthen the Vietnam peace accords and did not sign a draft docu ment that was expected to be released this weekend. One high American official had expressed optimism that the document would be signed promptly but added that difficul ties had arisen because of a “triangular argument” among the United States and North and South Vietnam. Mr. Kissinger returned to Washington. Mr. Tho will remain in Paris. Their top aides are expected to resume the Paris negotiations Monday. [Page 1, Column 8.]
WASHINGTON, June 10 —Henry A. Kissinger and Hanoi's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho, decided to break off their talks in Paris yesterday for a few days when “it became clear” they could not quickly resolve the last‐minute reservations raised by Saigon to the pro posed document on strengthen ing the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement, an Administration official said today.
WASHINGTON, June 10 —Henry A. Kissinger and Hanoi's chief negotiator, Le Due Tho, decided to break off their talks in Paris yesterday for a few days when “it became clear” they could not quickly resolve the last‐minute reservations raised by Saigon to the pro posed document on strengthen ing the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement, an Administration official said today.
SYDNEY, Australia, June 10 —Prime Minister Gough Whit lam has returned from India—where his foreign policy pro posals reportedly got a mixer reception — to face tough po litical decisions at home.
TOKYO, June 10 (Reuters)—The Kyodo news agency said today that the draft of a docu ment agreed on at the Paris negotiations to salvage the Viet nam cease‐fire had called for both sides in the South to order a cease‐fire 24 hours after the document was signed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 10—American and South Vietnamese officials in Saigon wearily began preparing today for yet another round of Paris talks in search of a way to carry out the Vietnam cease fire strictly.
After Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho broke off their second effort in Paris to restore the fractured Vietnam peace last week, an American official said that difficul ties had arisen due to a “triangular argument” among the Governments of the United States, North Vietnam and South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 11—The United States plans to re sume negotiations with North Vietnam on extending economic aid to Hanoi once agreement is reached in Paris on ways to strengthen the Vietnam cease fire accord, a high‐ranking Ad ministration official said today.
The United States plans to resume nego tiations with North Vietnam on extending economic aid to Hanoi once agreement is reached in Paris on ways to strengthen the Vietnam cease‐fire accord, a high‐ranking Administration official said. [Page 1, Col. 4.]
WASHINGTON, June 11 (UPI)—Thirty‐nine of the 420 married American prisoners of war returned from Vietnam either have gotten or are get ting divorces, the Pentagon's chief medical officer reports.
WASHINGTON, June 11—The United States plans to re sume negotiations with North Vietnam on extending economic aid to Hanoi once agreement is, reached in Paris on ways to strengthen the Vietnam cease fire accord, a high‐ranking Ad ministration official said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, June 12—Sources close to President Nguyen Van

SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 12—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho have drafted a document that aims at strength ening their original Vietnam agreement with a call for a firm cease‐fire within 24 hours of signing and with a restatement of other key provisions, accord ing to sources close to the Sai gon Government.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 12—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc The have drafted a document that aims at strength ening their original Vietnam agreement with a call for a firm cease‐fire within 24 hours of signing and with a restatement of other key provisions, accord ing to sources close to the Sai gon Government.
PARIS, June 12—Henry A. Kissinger and North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho, conferred for more than four hours today in their continuing effort to salvage the Vietnam cease‐fire.
HONG KONG, June 12 (Reu ters)—Foreign minister Krister Wickman of Sweden said today that one or two United States helicopters taking part in mine clearing in North Vietnamese waters had been blown up when mines exploded accident ly.
PARIS, June 13—Following are excerpts from a news conference given here today by Nguyen Xuan Phong, dep uty chief of the South Viet namese delegation to the Paris negotiations on Viet nam, as recorded and trans lated from the French by The New York Times:
PARIS, June 13—Following is a transcript of a news conference today by Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security offairs, as recorded by The New York Times:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 13 (Reuters) — Five people died and 20 were injured when an explosion rocked an outdoor movie theater in the Mekong Delta province of An Xuyen, the South Vietnamese command said today. A spokesman said that five of the injured were policemen.
PARIS, June 13—The United States, North Vietnam, the Sai gon Government and the Viet cong joined today in calling for an end of all cease‐fire viola tions this Friday.
WASHINGTON, June 13—The Vietnam communiqué signed in Paris today revealed little more than that all sides were still willing to reaffirm on paper their January commit ment to a cease‐fire and po litical conciliation in Indochina.
May 13, 1968—In the wake of the Communists’ Tet offen sive and President Johnson's curbing of the bombing of North Vietnam, W. Averell Harriman and Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's Minister of State, begin peace talks in Paris.
WASHINGTON, June 13—Following, as made public by the White House, is the text of a joint communiqué signed in Paris today by Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, detailing means of strengthening the Vietnam cease fire. The communiqué was drawn up in two versions. The “four party” version was signed first. Three hours later, because the Saigon Government is unwilling to imply recognition of the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government, a “two party” version mentioning that Gov ernment was signed by the United States and North Viet nam only.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, June 14—South Viet nam's Foreign Minister, Tran Van Lam, said today that he felt the Paris communiqué was an improvement over the orig inal Vietnam cease‐fire accord, but he said that the document left unresolved some of the critical differences between Saigon and the Communists.
WASHINGTON, June 13—De spite the Hanoi‐Washington de cision to tighten the Vietnam cease‐fire, Congressional oppo nents of the bombing in Cam bodia said today that they would continue their efforts to enact legislation cutting off funds for the air strikes.
WASHINGTON, June 13—The Vietnam communiqué signed in Paris today revealed little more than that all sides were still willing to reaffirm on paper their January commit ment to a cease‐fire and po litical conciliation in Indochina.
PARIS, June 13—Henry A. Kissinger said today that “there was one fleeting mo ment” before the new Viet nam cease‐fire agreement was signed when “Saigon had our position, we had Hanoi's position and Hanoi had Sai gon's position.”
The second Vietnam peace agreement that was signed yesterday in Paris by representatives of the United States, North and South Vietnam and the Vietcong is essentially a retread of the Jan. 27 Paris pact, with all the weak nesses of that much‐abused document.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 13 (UPI)—Mrs. Ngo Ba Thanh, imprisoned by the South Vietnamese Government for anti‐government activities, today demanded her release so that she can accept a teaching post at Columbia University in New York.
PARIS, June 14—Following are the text of a statement delivered at a news confer ence today by Le Duc Tho, special North Vietnamese rep resentative, and excerpts from questions and answers at the conference. The statement was issued in English by the North Vietnamese, and the questions and answers were recorded and translated from the French by The Times.
WASHINGTON, June 14 (AP) —Brig. Gen. John P. Flynn of the Air Force, the highest rank ing of the returned prisoners of war, was assigned today as deputy commandant of the Air War College, at the Air Univer sity, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama. General Flynn, 50 years old, was shot down over North Vietnam in 1967. He is on leave, at his home’ in Shall mer, Fla and will take over his new job Aug. 20, a Penta gon spokesman said.
WASHINGTON, June 14—Leaders of a coalition Of or ganizations seeking Congres sional support to alter proposed Federal spending programs as cused President Nixon today of seeking a “Vietnamization” of America's urban problems in his 1974 budget proposals.
Following are excerpts from a news briefing by Henry A. Kissinger in Washington yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of A.B.C. News:
PARIS, June 14—Le Duc Tho today hailed the new Vietnam agreement he and Henry A. Kissinger had negotiated as “victory of reason” and said that, if strictly observed, it would insure a lasting peace.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, June 15—The second Viet nam cease‐fire went into effect as scheduled at noon today, amid reports from the battle field that there had been less last‐minute fighting than ex pected.
WASHINGTON, June 14 (AP) —Seventeen ships in a naval minesweeping force began oper ations today to make North Vietnamese waters safe for shipping.
PARIS, June 14—Brig. Gen. Lon Non, brother of President Lon Nol of Cambodia, said today that the United States had obtained an assurance from Hanoi that North Vietnamese troops would be withdrawn “rather rapidly” from his country.
WASHINGTON, June 14—Henry A. Kissinger hinted broadly today that the United States had received some kind of assurances from North Viet nam in Paris that could provide the basis for an end to the fighting in Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, June 16 — Scattered fighting continued throughout South Vietnam yesterday after the reinforced cease‐fire went into effect, but reports from the field indicated that the en counters were fewer and on a far smaller scale than those that accompanied the original cease‐fire last January.
MY PHUOC TAY, South Vietnam, June 15—At noon today, when the newly reaf firmed cease‐fire was to go into effect, an army private sat at the wheel of a pickup truck in this village in the Mckong Delta intently listen ing to the thunder of artil ?? in the distance.
Australia's first Labor Prime Minister in nearly a quar ter of a century is a man in a hurry. Even before Labor ousted the Liberal‐Country coalition Government last December, Gough Whitlam had charted major shifts for his country's foreign policy, including prompt recognition of mainland China, withdrawal of the remaining Austra lian troops in Vietnam, a loosening of traditional dependence on the United States and Britain along with an effort to build much closer links to Australia's Asian neighbors.
International Scattered fighting continued throughout South Vietnam after the reinforced cease fire went into effect, but reports from the field indicated that the encounters were fewer and on a far smaller scale than those that accompanied the original cease‐fire last January, But there were other indications that the provisions of the Paris communique signed Wednesday night might not be car ried out on schedule. [Page 1, Columns 2‐3.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, June 16—Scattered fighting continued throughout South Vietnam today after the second cease‐fire went into af fect yesterday, but reports from the field indicated that the bat tles were fewer and on a far smaller scale that those that accompanied the original cease fire last January.
HONOLULU, June 16 (AP)—Two United States Air Force F‐111 aircraft collided over Cambodia today and one of the swing‐wing jets crashed, the Pacific military command reported.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 16 (AP)—Phantom soldiers in the Cambodian Army are disappearing, but senior West ern diplomats say officers are still collecting American‐fi nanced salaries for about 44, 000 nonexistent troops.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 17—Fighting con tinued to sputter across South Vietnam yesterday, despite the beginning of the second cease fire Friday, and the local com manders of the opposing forces did not meet as required by the Paris communiqué.
Col. James L. Lamar took his 16‐year‐old son to a baseball game for the first time last night, and few such outings have ever been so fervently anticipated or so genuinely ap preciated.
SAIGON—In the dry, brown rice fields of Quang Nam Province in central South Vietnam, six chil dren were killed by a mine last week as they flew a kite, long a symbol of peace in the Vietnamese countryside. It was incident number 16,547 since the first cease‐fire went into effect last January, according to the Saigon Government's count, and made a total of over 30,400 persons killed after the war was supposed to have stopped. Few Viet namese expect the second cease‐fire agreement, signed in Paris last Wednesday, to be any more effective in bringing peace.
WASHINGTON — The major prob lems bedeviling President Richard M. Nixon have the torturing quality of persistence: the Vietnam war, the Wa tergate affair and inflation seem to go on forever, and now the President is facing them with a badly weakened White House staff. Last week, he took unilateral action in the only place he could: He announced another dramatic and unexpected move in economic policy. By his own admission, he took the first step into Phase 4 with dis taste.
HONOLULU, June 17—Amer ican planes bombing Cambo dia are being kept out of a two‐mile‐wide “buffer zone” on the Cambodian side of the Vietnamese border, according to high‐ranking United States military officials here. The aim is to reduce the chances of the planes’ violating the Vietnam truce agreement by straying over South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, June 18—The spo radic fighting that marked the start of the second Vietnam cease‐fire on Friday continued yesterday, though there were no reports of major attacks by either Communist or Gov ernment troops.
MANILA, June 18 (UPI)—An 11th crewman of the United States Navy vessel who was charged with disobedience while minesweeping off North Vietnam pleaded guilty today and was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment at hard labor, the Navy reported.
WASHINGTON, June 18 (UPI) —Attorneys for First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. sought today, to obtain full details of any White House involvement in an investigation of the My Lai massacre by two figures in volved in the Watergate case.
WASHINGTON, June 18 —James R. Schlesinger portrayed himself today as a Defense Sec retary who accepted the poli cies of the past and was recon ciled to a steady increase in the military budget.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 18 (Reuters)—South Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Tram Van Lam is temporarily withdrawing from the Saigon Government to run in the Senate elections in August, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said today.
PARIS, June 18 (Reuters)—The United States and North Vietnam resumed talks today on how to direct the flow of American economic aid to Hanoi, which could come to $2.5‐billion over the next five years.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—One of Saigon's top coutu riers wears a green jade brace let on her left wrist that is reputed to have cost six million piasters ($12,000). Since she bought it a few years ago her business has boomed and she has achieved everything she wanted.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, June 19 — Sporadic clashes were reported from all regions of South Vietnam yes terday on the fourth day of the new cease‐fire.
HONOLULU, June 18—Under current plans, the Navy's re newed minesweeping in North Vietnamese waters will leave numerous deactivated mines at the bottom of Haiphong Harbor, according to a high‐ranking military commander here.
WASHINGTON, June 18—John W. Dean 3d has told Fed eral investigators that he kept $14,000 in 1972 Republican campaign funds and at one time “borrowed” $4,000 to finance his wedding and honeymoon, sources close to the Watergate case said today.
WASHINGTON, June 19 (AP) —Senator Harrison A. Wil liams, Democrat of New Jersey, introduced a bill today to au thorize a program of assistance for Vietnamese children or Thaned or otherwise displaced by the war. The bill would au thorize $2.5‐million to help the Vietnamese Government set up agencies and programs for the health and welfare of South Vietnamese children.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 19 (UPI)—The Vietcong denied today that any of their troops fired on two helicopters of the international peace‐keeping force on Sunday and accused the Canadian delegation of “in accurate reporting” of the in cident.
HANOI, North Vietnam, June 19 Agence France Presse — The first group of American special ists who will renew minesweep ing arrived yesterday in the port of Haiphong, the official Vietnam press agency said to day.
PARIS, June 19 (UPI)—Ameri can and North Vietnamese of ficials met today for the 10th time to determine how much money Washington should give Hanoi in reconstruction as sistance.
The National Broadcasting Company fared rather poorly in this year's Emmy Awards for news, but the network apparently is determined to make the competition stiffer the next time around. Last week N.B.C. Reports offered the producer Fred Freed's “Murder in America.” Last night, at 10, it presented Rob ert Northshield's equally tough and unblinking “The Sins of the Fathers.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 19—Jet fighters howled overhead and snarling tanks shook the streets of Saigon to day as the South Vietnamese Army staged the biggest armed forces day parade in the his tory of the country. only five days after the reaffirmation of the cease‐fire.
MANILA, June 20 (UPI)— A 12th crew member of the amphibious transport dock Og den charged with disobeying orders while minesweeping off North Vietnam pleaded guilty today and was sentenced to 45 days hard labor, United States Navy officials reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, June 21 (AP)—In tense fighting, the heaviest since the reaffirmation of the cease‐fire last Friday, was re ported yesterday in three areas of South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 21 (AP) —A former high‐ranking pris oner of war, Adm. James V. Stockdale, has filed miscon duct charges against two other officers who were with him in North Vietnamese prison camps, Pentagon sources said tonight.
WASHINGTON, June 21 (UPI) —In the five months since the signing of the Vietnam cease fire, the United States has bombed Cambodia as heavily as it did in the preceding three years, according to Pentagon statistics just made public.
WASHINGTON, June 22 (AP) —The Navy today declared the main channel of Haiphong har bor, the principal port of North Vietnam, to be open and safe for shipping.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 22 (Reuters) — The weekly American flight carry ing Communist officials be tween Saigon and Hanoi was canceled today because North Vietnamese passengers re portedly refused to sign a form saying that they were not car rying explosives.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 23 (AP) — Some foreign travel ers stopping over in South Vietnam will be allowed to stay in the country for up to three days without an entry visa, ac cording to a report by the offi cial Vietnam Press.
To the Editor: Besides its menacing economic ef fects, the present energy crisis has also a political, potentially virulent aspect: A worldwide competitive bid ding for Arabian (and Iranian) oil could lastingly envenom the relations between the regions of the industrial ized non‐Communist world—North America, Western Europe, Japan and Oceania.
PORTSMOUTH, Va., June 23 (UPI) — Air Force Col. Fred Cherry, a prisoner of war in North Vietnam for eight years, was granted a divorce yester day from his wife of 19 years. The decree, granted in Ports mouth Circuit Court, denied alimony payments to Mrs. Cherry and left unresolved the custody of the couple's’ two youngest children.
TOKYO, June 23—A major Japanese trading concern is drafting a program for the con struction of a gigantic indus trial zone in the Cam Ranh Bay area of South Vietnam.
TRENTON—Recently discharged Vietnam war veterans are finding it easier to get jobs in New Jersey than a year or two ago, although the new entrants into the state's labor market are asking for better positions and better pay.
Robert Jay Lifton is a research psychiatrist at Yale who is best known as the author of “Death in Life: Survivors of Hiroshima,” which won the National Book Award for science in 1969. He is also one of Erik Erikson's most prolific and in telligent disciples in the much‐pub licized field of “psychohistory” the application of psychoanalytic knowledge to the lives of great men (as Erikson has done with Luther and Gandhi) or to the study of groups of men in great historical and social stress (as Lifton has done with vic tims of Chinese brainwashing and with survivors of Hiroshima).
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 23—In the week since the Vietnam cease‐fire was reaf firmed fighting across the country has dipped to about the same level as in late May Little else has changed.
WASHINGTON, June 24 (UPI) —A group of former national security officials said today that the Administration's de fense budget request for the fiscal’ year 1974 could be cut by as much as $14‐billion without endangering the na tion's security.
BUENOS AIRES, June 25 (AP) — Argentina and East Germany established formal diplomatic relations tonight. East Germany was the second’ Communist country to be recog nized by the new Peronist Government ,which took office here May 25. The first was Cuba. President Hector J. Campora has said his adminis tration also plans to establish relations with North Korea and North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 25 (Reuters)—An agree ment on plans to exchange military and civilian prisoners was announced today by the Vietcong after a meeting with Saigon Government representa tives. But a new deadlock soon developed, and further talks on the issue were scheduled for tomorrow.
WASHINGTON, June 25—The House of Representatives, in its strongest antiwar action to date, voted today to cut off all funds for United States bomb ing in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, June 25—Other former insiders have vaguely spoken of an “almost paranoid” mood in the Nixon White House and a fight‐fire with‐fire reaction that under cut respect for law.
WASHINGTON, June 25 (UPI) —Unconditional amnesty for all who refused to participate in the Vietnam war has been called for by the American Jewish Congress.
A marine veteran of the war in Vietnam who had been in Veterans Hospital until yester day was charged by the police last night with stabbing five patrons of a Queens diner with a knife and fork.
WASHINGTON, June 26 —President Johnson ordered the Federal Bureau of Investigation to investigate Spiro T. Agnew shortly after Mr. Agnew was elected Vice President in No vember, 1968, reliable Govern pent sources said today.
WASHINGTON, June 26 (AP)—The Navy disclosed to day that Rear Adm. James B. Stockdale had charged two for mer prisoners of war with six alleged offenses, including mutiny, aiding the enemy, re fusing to obey orders and try ing to persuade other P.O.W.s to be insubordinate.
There's no arguing with one thing: as an anthology of journalism written during the last dozen years or so, Tom Wolfe's and E. W. Johnson's “The New Journal ism” is just fine. It's a pleasure to read, even for a second or third time, the best of its two‐dozen selections (among the self contained pieces, these are Joan Didion's “Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream,” Garry Wills's “Martin Luther King Is Still on the Case,” and Barbara L. Goldsmith's “La Dolce Vita”). What's more, the book is a useful historical and journalistic rec ord of the period it covers: it's good to have available in a single volume some of the better reporting that was done on the counterculture (Robert Christgau's “Beth Ann and Macrobioticism” and Joe Eszterhas's “Charlie Simpson's Apoc alypse”) and Vietnam (Michael Herr's “Khesanh” and Nicholas Tomalin's “The General Goes Zapping Charlie Cong”), not to mention some of the extraordinary pieces written during the period by writers like Rex Reed, Truman Capote, Terry Southern, Hunter S. Thompson, Norman Mailer, George Plimpton, James Mills, “Adam Smith,” and Toni Wolfe himself (represented here by selections from “The Electric Kool‐Aid Acid Test” and “Radical Chic & Man‐Mauning the Flack catcher”).
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, June 27—An in crease in military attacks by Communist forces was reported yesterday by the Saigon Gov ernment, but most of the ac tions were described as small.
ALBANY, June 27 — Gover nor Rockefeller vetoed a bill that attempted to clarify the tangled maze of laws on Sun day‐selling in the state, and signed a measure that gives sizable tax benefit to the New York Telephone Company, his office said today.
COMMERCE CITY, Colo., June 27 (AP) — A young mar ine charged with collaborating with the enemy while in North Vietnam prison camp shot himself to death today, the police said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 27 (Reuters)—Members of an international cease‐fire observa tion team were caught in a barrage of Communist mortar fire east of Saigon yesterday during an inspection of the site of an alleged truce violation.
WASHINGTON, June 27 (AP) —Vice President Agnew said today that he was not dis turbed by reports that Presi dent Johnson ordered the Fed eral Bureau of Investigation late in 1968 to investigate i whether Mr. Agnew had been the source of leaks about the Vietnam peace negotiations in Paris.
WASHINGTON, June 27—The Defense Department told Senate committee today that the Indochina cease‐fire agree ments would permit a reduction of at least $500‐million in planned military aid to South Vietnam and Laos in the fiscal year beginning next Sunday, July 1.
WASHINGTON, June 27 (Reuters) — A United States Navy special force cleared mines from five main channels in the Haiphong area of the North Vietnamese coast and has begun minesweeping around Vinh, to the south, the Defense Department said today.
WASHINGTON, June 27—The Defense Department told a Senate committee today that the Indochina cease‐fire agree ments would permit a reduction of at least $500‐million in planned military aid to South Vietnam and Laos in the fiscal year beginning next Sunday, July 1.
PARIS, June 28 (UPI)—Saigon said today the South Vietnamese should hold elections on Christmas Day and make it “a day of joy,” but the Communist Vietcong rejected the suggestion as “phony.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 29 (Reuters) —Two Canadian truce observers are missing in an area of east of Saigon after making contact with Vietcong forces„ a Canadian delegation spokesman said today.
WASHINGTON, June 28—The Senate unanimously confirmed today the nomination of James R. Schlesinger to be Secretary of Defense, thus filling a vacuum in the top Pentagon leadership created by the reshuffling of the Nixon Cabinet in the wake of the Watergate affair. The voice vote was 91 too.Dr. Schlesinger said that the only circumstance in which could foresee any possibility of renewing the bombing would be “major aggressive actions by the North Vietnamese which would threaten South Vietnam; in obvious violation of the Paris agreements.” He added he did “not believe that such circumstances will arise.”
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 28 (UPI)—American planes struck repeatedly today at rebel forces advancing toward the Cambodian capital from the north on Routes 5 and 6.
SAN FRANCISCO, June 28 (AP)—A former Vietnam war prisoner today denied charges of mutiny and aiding the enemy, saying he had repeatedly exposed himself to punishment from the North Vietnamese during five years captivity.
Howard Hughes has picked up London's option. The reclusive industrialist slipped out of The Inn on the Park hotel, made his way to Stansted Airport, boarded a chartered aircraft and flew to Ostend, Belgium. About an hour later, he returned to Britain, where he received a visitor's visa good for another six months. According to the Home Office, the whole to‐do was really quite unnecessary, as it is not necessary to leave and re‐enter the country for extension of permission to stay. Mr. Hughes has been in Britain since he left Nicaram& after last year's earthquakes.
DENVER, June 28—The wife of a former prisoner of war who fatally shot himself yesterday charged today that his countrymen had killed him with harassment and torment.
WASHINGTON, June 29—Administration officials said today that President Nixon would probably name Ellsworth Bunker, former Ambassador to South. Vietnam, as the chief negotiator in the Panama Canal discussions.
BEIRUT, Lebanon, June 29—A Syrian military delegation arrived in Hanoi today to seek North Vietnamese military advisers for the Syrian armed forces, according to informed travelers from Damascus. They said that the leftist Syrian Government wanted experts in guerrilla warfare and in the use of surface‐to‐air missiles built by the Soviet.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 29 (UPI)—Two Canadian truce observers who made a practice of visiting the remotest South Vietnamese hamlets in their territory disappeared last night, but a Canadian spokesmand said today that they were believed to be safe.
If the future of South Vietnam remains obscure, the impact of the American intervention is clearly visible to anyone who has lived in the country's cities and moved about its countryside. What did the “American decade” mean to the South in terms of political, social and other changes?
STOCKHOLM, March 31 (Reu‐ters) — The Swedish International Development Authority today announced the largestever Swedish project in a forelmu country, a $68‐million paper factory in North Vietnam.
As Under Secretary of State during both the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, George W. Ball played a major role in shaping the nation's foreign policy. But with regard to Vietnam he often provided a lonely voice of dissent. David Halberstam, in his recently published book, “The Best and the Brightest” (Random House), deals at length with the role Ball played of arguing vigorously against the Government's policy while remaining in the Government. “When he read the [Gen. Maxwell D.] Taylor cables calling for a small, oh so small, commitment, 8,000 men, he immediately told [Presidential adviser McGeorge] Bundy and [Secretary of Defense Robert S.] McNamara that if they went ahead with the Taylor proposals, the commitment would not stay small. They would have 300,000 men in there within five years. When Ball himself made exactly the same point to Kennedy, the President laughed and said, “ ‘George, you're crazier than hell,” writes Halberstam. And Johnson would study a Ball antiescalation memo all night and then question him carefully, citing page and paragraph without looking at it: “George, here on Page 18...”
Just as he was the most controversia sports figure in the United States during the Vietnam conflict, Muhammad Ali was the most debated athlete in the prisoner of war camps.
Now that the guns have fallen officially—if not actually—silent in Vietnam, there will be endless arguments as to whether we could not have made a better settlement or made it sooner. Since that debate will produce few useful insights, we would do better to focus on two other questions: how can we avoid making the same mistakes again and, if, by misjudgment or misadventure, we should get into another such mess, how can we extricate ourselves at minimum cost?
VIRGINIA BEACH, Va., March 31—To the North Vietnamese, Capt. James A. Mulligan Jr. had a “bad attitude.” As a result, he suffered heavily during his seven years in Hanoi prison.
Federal job‐training programs should not try to square pegs into round holes, according to a Columbia professor who studied job‐training programs for the Government. Training programs that try to turn “easy‐going, undisciplined” persons into “organized, motivated, timeconscious” workers are bound to fail, Dr. Amitai Etziono said yesterday. “It costs too much, hurts too much, and will not work,” he said.
SAIGON—It came to an end in a welter of contradictory emotions, acts and gestures that—in a manner so characteristic of the whole Vietnam experience—left nothing clearly defined.
Bands thundered, bagpipes skirled, forests of American flags Waved wildly, and large sidewalk crowds roared their approval yesterday as tens of thousands of marchers paraded up Broadway in an outpouring of tribute to the men who served the nation in Southeast Asia during the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 31—President Nguyen Van Thieu left today for the United States to seek assurances of continued American military and economic aid from President Nixon.

WASHINGTON — The scene was a recreation hall at Andrews Air Force Base in suburban Virginia. In almost casual tones, tinged with the twang of his native Oklahoma, Col. Robinson Risner told about life In a North Viet‐, namese prison camp.
Forty‐eight more American prisoners of war were flown home yesterday to be followed by a final group of 69 today, when the last prisoner held in South Vietnam will also be freed.
CORONADO, Calif.—Ten years ago, I toured the old Yuma Territorial Prison with my two eldest sons. Then aged 12 and 8, they had come on the bus from San Diego the previous day to visit me. Our visits together were not frequent. I was the commanding officer of a Navy fighter squadron and much of my time was spent away from home either at sea or on the gunnery ranges in Arizona.
The air of finality with which President Nixon heralded the American withdrawal from Vietnam Thursday night has been welcomed with gratitude and relief across the country. The nation and its elected representatives Congress now have the right to insist that this finality be reflected in the Administration's actions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 31 — The chief North Vietnamese and American delegates to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission left Saigon today, and the Communists accused the United States and South Vietnam of having “systematically and very seriously sabotaged” major provisions of the Paris peace agreement.
Three Navy pilots released after six years in prison in North Vietnam yesterday detailed the torture they said they received at the hands of their captors.
As the burden of Vietnam duty is lifted from a generation of American youth, an American of another age now granted leave to lay down his responsibilities in that land of frustration and despair. Six weeks short of his 79th birthday, Ellsworth Bunker has been allowed resign as United States Ambassador in Saigon.
PARIS, March 31—The Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government has named Nguyen Van Tien, head of its diplomatic mission in Hanoi, as permanent observer at the United Nations in New York, the delegation here announced today.
CLARK AIR BASE, Philippines, April 1 (AP)—Gaunt and chalk‐faced, the last known United States war prisoner in Indochina ate his first American dinner in nearly three and a half years tonight after a release that until the last minute he feared might be a trick.
PHILADELPHIA, April 1 (AP) —The Rev. Carl McIntire, responding to stories of torture by returning prisoners of war, said today the planned to conduct “war crimes” trials of North Vietnamese leaders.
WASHINGTON, April 1—When President Nixon asked for the name of a shrewd, iron‐willed and experienced diplomat to replace Ellsworth Bunker as Ambassador to South Vietnam, the State Department came up with Graham A. Martin, a man who both his numerous boosters and detractors say fulfills all those requirements. “For every officer who likes Martin, there is another one who detests him,” one of his admirers said candidly on Friday, the day the White House announced Mr. Martin's nomination. “But you won't find anyone who doesn't respect him or thinks he won't do the job out there.”
Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson yesterday defended the continuing United States bombing of Cambodia as necessary to keep alive the anti‐Communist Government of President Lon Nol and to press Communist forces into accepting a ceasefire, as they have in Vietnam and Laos. Mr. Richardson, who spoke on the “Meet the Press” television program, said that “it would be very difficult” for the Cambodian Goyernment to survive without United States air support because of “a massive threat by well‐armed, well‐organized guerrilla forces, which include forces from North Vietnam itself.” [Page 1, Column 8.]President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam arrived in Los Angeles for two days of meetings with President Nixon at his home in San. Clemente, 60 miles south of Los Angeles. Mr. Thieu's visit, his first since he became President in 1967, is intended mainly to enhance his stature at home, but also to change the minds of at least some American critics who regard him as a petty dictator. [3:4.8.]Capt. Robert T. White of the Army, the last United States war prisoner in Indochina, arrived at Clark Air Base in the Philippines after a release that until the last minute he feared might be a trick. Captain White, 32 years old and from Newport News, Va., was flown from Saigon after his release in a Mekong Delta village. Meanwhile, the last group of American war prisoners arrived at Travis Air Force Base in California, ending Operation Homecoming, which brought back 587 men freed from Communist prison camps. [2:4‐6.]Under James R. Schlesinger, its new director, the Central Intelligence Agency is apparently planning to curtail some of its old activities, notably clandestine military operations, and undertake new ones, including action against political terrorism and the international drug traffic. [1:6‐7.]NationalSenator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., Republican of Connecticut and a member of the Senate committee investigating the. Watergate bugging case, said that James W. McCord Jr., one of the men involved in the bugging, ordered that the Capitol offices of certain Senators and Representatives be kept under visual surveillance. [1:6‐7.]
WASHINGTON, April 1—Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson today defended the continuing American bombing of Cambodia as necessary to keep the anti‐Communist Government of President Lon Nol alive and to presstire Communist forces into accepting cease‐fire there, as they have in Vietnam and Laos.
WASHINGTON, April 1—A former prisoner of war who has been threatened with court‐martial for his behavior in captivity, said tonight that the “pressure of conscience and morality” made him change his mind on the war while in captivity.
The Chinese Peoples’ Republic waited until American troops had left South Vietnam before announcing the head of its “liaison office” in Washington, who, practically speaking, will be Communist China's first tunbassador to the United States. Now that the choice is known, it must be recognized as a distinguished appointment, comparable to President Nixon's naming of David K. E. Bruce for the corresponding post in Peking. Huang Chen is China's highest ranking dipldmat, the only active envoy who is a full member of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. Moreover Mr. Huang is highly experienced, having served abroad in Europe and Asia.
WASHINGTON, April 1—Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson today defended the continuing American bombing of Cambodia as necessary to keep the anti‐Communist Government of President Lon Nol alive and to pressure Communist forces into accepting a cease‐fire there, as they, have in Vietnam and Laos.
LOS ANGELES, April 1—President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam arrived here to day for two days of meeting with President Nixon.
STOCKHOLM, April 1 (AP)—American military deserters can no longer expect automatic asylum in Sweden, a high Government official said today.
Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson yesterday defended the continuing United States bombing of Cambodia as necessary to keep alive the anti‐Communist Government of President Lon Nol and to press Communist forces into accepting a ceasefire, as they have in Vietnam and Laos. Mr. Richardson, who spoke on the “Meet the Press” television program, said that “it would be very difficult” for the Cambodian Government to survive without United States air support because of “a massive threat by well‐armed, well‐organized guerrilla forces, which include forces from North Vietnam itself.” [Page 1, Column 8.1President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam arrived’ in Los Angeles for two days of meetings with President Nixon at his home in San Clemente, 60 miles south of Los Angeles. Mr. Thieu's visit, his first since he became President in 1967, is intended mainly to enhance his stature at home, but also to change the minds of at least some American critics who regard him as a petty dictator. [3:4‐8.]Capt. Robert T. White of the Army, the last United States war prisoner in Indochina, arrived at Clark Air Base in the Philippines after a release that until the last minute he feared might be a trick. Captain White,. 32 years old and from Newport News, Va., was flown from Saigon after his release in a Mekong Delta village. Meanwhile, the last group of American war prisoners arrived at Travis Air Force Base in California, ending Operation Homecoming, which brought back 587 men freed from Communist prison camps. [2:4‐6.]Under James R. Schlesinger, its new director, the Central Intelligence Agency is apparently planning to curtail some of its old activities, notably clandestine military operations, and undertake new ones, including action against political terrorism and the international drug traffic. [1:6‐7.]NationalSenator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., Republican of Connecticut and a member of the Senate committee investigating the Watergate bugging case, said that James W. McCord Jr., one of the men involved in the bugging, ordered that the Capitol offices of certain
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 1 (AP)—The siego of a South Vietnamese ranger camp ended its fifth week today, the Government said. It also reported several small clashes in the Saigon region and said that seven civilians were killed in other attacks.
WASHINGTON, April 2 (UPI) —The Council Against Communist Aggression, a group formed during the Korean War, called today for formation of a tribunal to investigate charges by freed American prisoners of war that some prisoners had been tortured and killed.
ALBANY, April 2—After some sharp differences over women's liberation, the Assembly today passed a bill that would end longstanding strictures requiring certain women to, work fewer hours than men and preventing a woman from returning to work sooner than a month after giving birth.
WASHINGTON, April 2 —The Supreme Court took the following actions today:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 2—A Vietnamese bandit dressed as a policeman who had been robbing American officials and civilians in downtown Saigon was caught today when one of his intended victims pulled a gun.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., April 2—President Nixon and President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam opened a twoday conference here today in what the White House called an “atmosphere of friendship and cordiality.”

SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., April 2—President. Nixon and President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam. opened It twoday conference here today in what the White House called an “atmosphere of friendship and cordiality.”
WASHINGTON, April 2 (AP) —First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. appealed his conviction today for killing civilians at My Lai in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 2 (AP)—President Nixon and the Western White House are not taking part in the meat boycott and an expensive cut of beef was on the menu for a dinner tonight in honor of President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 2—The highest‐ranking American diplomat held prisoner in Vietnam said today that despite torture and four and a half years of solitary confinement, he advocated giving American economic aid to North Vietnam “to generate a stable peaceful coexistence” between the two countries.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 3—The TwoParty Joint Military Commission, which began operating as a peace‐keeping body only five days ago, was threatened with collapse today in a dispute over a besieged South Vietnamese ranger outpost.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., April 2—United Nations authorities say they have been caught surprise by the Vietcong's pointment of a diplomat represent the Provisional Revolutionary Government at United Nations.
Limiting his speech because of his broken jaw, Muhammad Ali, still in a San Diego hospital, called his wife, Belinda, in another hospital Sunday and learned she was in satisfactory condition. She was hospitalized because of a hysterical breakdown after watching Ali's loss to little‐known heavyweight, Ken Norton, Saturday.
WASHINGTON, April 3—A key Administration official said today that North Vietnam “fully understood” in the last hours of the Vietnam negotiations that the. United States would continue bombing in support of Cambodia's Government until a cease‐fire was achieved there.
PHOENIXVILLE, Pa., April 3 (AP)—Maj. Floyd H. Kushner the only physician who survived a Vietnam prison camp, said today that 45 per cent of all captured Americans failed to survive mainly because of bad food and lack of medical treatment.
CAMDEN, April 3—The first witness for the defense in the Camden 28 trial testified today that he stole draft records here in 1971, but as a justifiable protest against the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, April 3—A key Administration official said today that North Vietnam “fully understood” in the last hours of the Vietnam negotiations that the United States would continue bombing in support of Cambodia's Government until a cease‐fire was achieved there.
WASHINGTON, April 3—A key Administration official said today that North Vietnam “fully understooe in the last hours of the Vietnam negotiations that the United States would continue bombing in support of Cambodia's Government until a cease‐fire was achieved there.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., April 3 — Following is the text of a joint communiqué issued today by President Nixon and President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam after their meetings at the Western White House here:
Renewed tragedy, for Americans and Vietnamese alike, could follow if President Thieu is allowed to depart this land under certain mistaken impressions, perhaps nurtured by his own wishful thinking. Beyond the noncommittal rhetoric of their final communiqué, we cannot know what President Thieu has been told in his two days of talks with President Nixon in San Clemente. But his travels across the country in the days to come, the South Vietnamese leader will meet a variety of other Americans, in and out of office, and certain points should become clear to him.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif. April 3—President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam left the Western White House today with a promise of continuing economic aid but without a specific pledge of American military action if his country is imperiled.
President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam ended two days of talks yesterday with President Nixon with a promise of continuing economic aid, but without a specific pledge of American military action if his country was imperiled. A joint communique issued at President Nixon's home in San Clemente, Calif., where the meetings took place, said a “full consensus” had been reached, and that the talks were held “in very cordial atmosphere.” [Page 1, Cols. 2–3.] The text of the communique is on Page 12.
WASHINGTON, April 3 (AP), —Representative Lester L. wolf, Democrat of Nassau County, introduced legislation today to provide major tax credits to employers of Vietnam era veterans.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., April 3—President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam left the Western White House today with a promise of continuing economic aid but without a specitic pledge of American military action if his country is imperiled.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 4—A fresh effort to arrange an end to the siege of a South Vietnamese ranger outpost failed yesterday when South Vietnamese delegates to the Two‐Party Joint Military Commission walked out of a meeting and accused the Vietcong of not negitiating “seriously.”
HONOLULU, April 3 (UPI)—Five Navy men were resuced from the sea yesterday after their helicopter crashed into the water while conducting minesweeping operations in Haiphong Harbor in North Vietnam. A Navy spokesman said the helicopter had been towing a magnetic minesweeping hydrofoil south of the main Haiphong channel when it made a “controlled landing” in the sea.
PHOENIXVILLE, Pa., April 4 (AP) — The last American prisoner of war to leave Vietnam said today, after reunion with his wife, that he felt “just about the same as the first man who got out —there's nothing like freedom.”
Nets vs. Carolina Cougars, A.B.A. Eastern Division semifinal playoff, at Nassau Coliseum, Uniondale, L.I., 7:35 P.M. (Television —Channel E (cable), 7:30 P.M.) (Radio—WHN, 7:35 P.M.)
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 4 (AP)—Two American journalists reported today that they had been held prisoner by the Vietcong for two days and released today in a hamlet near the northern provincial capital of Quang Ngai.
Presidents Nixon and Thieu are agreed on the need for “appropriate vigorous reactions” to continuing violations of the cease‐fire agreements by North Vietnam. But the question remains whether President Nixon was appropriately vigorous in reacting also to the continuing violations of the truce terms by President Thieu.
KIEN HOA PROVINCE, South Vietnam, April 2—The small open boat chugged slowly down the Mekong River, the three of us straining our eyes in the blazing sun for any sign of life in the dense foliage on the bank.
LOS ANGELES, April 4 Donald S. Luce, who along with two American Congreessmen discovered the “tiger cages” in a South Vietnam prison in 1970, told the jury at the Pentagon papers trial today that disclosure of information about the “strategic hamlet” and “pacification” prograihs in Vietnam did not damage those programs.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 4 (AP)—North Vietnam and the Vietcong said today that torture charges by former American war prisoners threatened to interfere with return of the bodies of prisoners who died in captivity and the search for United States servicemen listed as missing.
WASHINGTON, April 4 (AP) —President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam was greeted by Vice President Agnew and a friendly demonstration when he arrived today from Los Angeles.
KIEN HOA PROVINCE, South Vietnam, April 2—The small open boat chugged slowly down the Mekong River, the three of us straining our eyes in the blazing sun for any sign of life in the dense foliage on the bank.
A group called the Vietnam Peace Parade Committee demonstrated in Times Square late yesterday against the visit to this country of President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam.
NAIROBI, Kenya, April 4 —In what appeared to be an attempt to improve strained relations with the United States, President Idi Amin of Uganda sent a message to President Nixon today praising him as “one of the most brilliant leaders in the Western world” for his efforts to end the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, April 5—President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam pledged today—in his first American public appearance — that he would “never, never” ask the United States to send troops back to Vietnam.
The bond market extended its modest upturn yesterday, shrugging off another sharp increase in wholesale prices during March and reports of intensified fighting in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 5 —Two Harvard biochemists have found that a component of defoliant chemical used by United States forces in South Vietnam has contaminated fish and shellfish in Vietnamese waters and they say it may pose longterm hazards for the human population.
Three Navy airmen told yesterday of having given information under torture to the North Vietnamese. But each said he had been able to offer some, resistance and none seemed in any way apologetic.
SAIGON—On July 19, 1941, Admiral Leahy, Ambassador to Vichy, France, transmitted this message from President Roosevelt: “If Japan was the winner [in World War II], the Japanese would take over French Indochina; and if the Allies won, we would.” In that psychology lay the root of future trouble.
WASHINGTON, April 5—The nation's rate of inflation in the last three months, as measured by the closely watched wholesale price index, was the highest since the Korean war and well above the worst inflation rate of the Vietnam war years, new Government tatistics showed today.
LOS ANGELES, April 5—Tom Hayden, the antiwar activist, told the Pentagon papers jury today that “a lot of the diplomacy on the part of the United States was stage‐managed to create the image that the United States was seeking peace” when, he said, it was not.
WASHINGTON, April 5—At the close of tonight's formal dinner at the State Department for President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam, Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, paused to chat with reporters.
WASHINGTON, April 5—The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to forbid any reconstruction aid to North Vietnam unless President Nixon obtained specific and prior approval of Congress.
PARIS, April 5—Xuan Thuy, who was North Vietnam's representative in Paris for more than four years of formal and secret Vietnam talks, said tonight that the United States was “trying to stall” on applying provisions of the cease‐fire agreement.
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 5—Senator Edward W. Brooke, who is on a tour of Indochina, said today that the anger in the United States over mistreatment of prisoners of war by the Communists could jeopardize future aid to North Vietnam and to other countries of Indochina.
The Senate voted overwhelmingly yesterday to require President Nixon to get specific Congressional approval before giving foreign aid to North Vietnam. The 88‐to‐3 vote was also a warning that the Senate would be unlikely to approve such aid, which the President favors. As one of the limitation's three opponents put it, “This is telegraphing the punch that ‘there ain't gonna be no aid.’ “ [Page 1, Columns 2–3.]
WASHINGTON, April 5—The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to forbid any reconstruction aid to North Vietnam unless President Nixon obtained specific and prior approval of Congress. The 88‐to‐3 vote represented an effort by members of the Senate to hold Mr. Nixon to his ledge to consult with Congress before carrying out his plan for postfar assistance in Indochina. More important, however, the vote constituted a w'rning —'a message to the Administration,” a's several Senators described it—that aid to Hanoi would not be likely to win Senate approval in any event.
VUNG TAU, South Vietnam, April 1—The traffic from the city grinds bumper to bumper on weekends. The long, white curve of beach disappears beneath the crush of bathers, Coke bottles and beer cans. And the strains of “Jesus Chrik Superstar” echoing from thousands of cassette tape recorders rend the air.
James B. Irwin, the retired astronaut, was at the Fitzsimmons Army Medical Center in Aurora, Colo., after suffering chest pains while playing handball. “The concern here is that he had a heart attack,” a hospital spokesman said of the 43‐year‐old former Air Force officer who traveled to the moon on the Apollo 15 flight in 1971. Mr. Irwin, who was said to be resting comfortably at the medical center's cardiac unit, is now president of High Flight, an evangelist organization.
WASHINGTON, Apia 5—President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam pledged today—in his first American public appearance — that he would “never, never” ask the United States to send troops back to Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, April 6 — The South Vietnamese Government reported several big Communist attacks last night.
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 6—Senator Edward W. Brooke, who had hoped to make an assessment of Norths, Vietnam's postwar reconstruction needs, was informed by Hanoi today that he could not visit for the time being.
DALAT, South Vietnam, April 6—Many South ese are as concerned these days about rising prices, increasing unemployment and the social ravages of corrupity of their army to cope with tion as they are about the abilnew military pressure from the Communists now that the Americans are gone.
SAN DIEGO, Calif., April 6 (AP) — Three United States destroyers will be turned over to the Government of Taiwan this month, the Navy says. The destroyers—the Hanson, James E. Kyes and Shelton—all were built in the mid‐1940's and were used in Korea and Vietnam, a Navy spokesman said yesterday.
To the Editor: In response to your March 28 editorial and a number of articles in various publications concerning Vietnam veterans and their role in society, or lack of it, upon their return, this Vietnam veteran desires to make a few remarks of his own.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, [Saturday, April 7 (AP)—The] Saigon command and the Vietcong accused each other yesterday of land‐grabbing attacks through much of South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 6—President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam was reported by his close aides today to have asked President Nixon for an American economic aid commitment of more than $700‐million yearly through 1975—with a sharp reduction after that.
WASHINGTON, April 6—A few days after toying with the idea of running for Mayor and with 19 months still to go before the 1974 election, Senator Jacob K. Javits disclosed this week that he was starting to put together a “preliminary organization” for his fourth‐term re‐election campaign. The 68 — year — old New York Republican volunteered the information to reporters, but he denied that he was starting his senatorial campaign a little early.
CHAMPAIGN, Ill., April 6 (AP)—Attempting to extract a “confession” and military information, the Chinese tortured an American flier who strayed over their territory after a combat mission against North Vietnam, the returned prisoner says.
WASHINGTON, April 6 (AP) — Secretary of the Mr Force Robert C. Seamans Jr. confirmed today the promotions of three Air Force sergeants to second lieutenant while they were war prisoners of the North Vietnamese.
Senate action bairing any United States aid to North Vietnam without specific authorization by Congress a reasonable reaffirmation of a Congressional prerogative.
Jean Westwood, the former Democratic National Committee chairman, plans to take a poll to determine what her chances might be of winning a Senate seat next year from Utah, her home state. Mrs. Westwood was replaced by Robert Strauss as party chairman in December in the wake of the defeat of Senator George McGovern in the Presidential campaign. She said in Salt Lake City that either she or Representative Wayne Owens might have a chance to win the Utah seat now held by Senator Wallace F. Bennett, a 74‐year‐old Republican who has not yet said whether he would run for reelection in 1974. Mrs. Westwood, who is 49 years old, said that if Mr. Owens, who is 35, decided to run for the Senate, she might run for the House.
LOS ANGELES, April 6 (AP) —Jane Fonda, the antiwar activist, said today that she believes some American prisoners of war were tortured in North Vietnam but — it probably was not widespread nor was it a general policy.
DAYTON, Ohio, April 6 (UPI) —First Lieut. Bruce M. Ashley, a pacifist Air Force physician who was sentenced Wednesday to 18 months at hard labor and fined $25,000 for refusing to perform his military duties as protest against the Vietnam war, has been released from custody pending a hearing on an appeal. Ashley, a 26‐year‐old Quaker, will be on an unpaid leave of absence until the appeal of the court‐martial sentence is heard.
WASHINGTON, April 6—President and Mrs. Nguyen Van Thieu were smiling—alrays the smiles and graciousness, the polite words and thank you's—as they moved from one event to the next in three days of an official visit here.
Playing under the old‐fashioned rules, with only nine men to a side, the Mets brought baseball back to New York yesterday with a 3‐0 victory over Steve Carlton and the Ph iladelphiia Phil lies.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sunday, April 8 (UPI)—Commufist gunners ambushed a 19‐vessel convoy carrying vital supplies up the Mekong River to Phnom Penh today and forced most of the vessels to turn back into South Vietnam, according to radio messages from the vessels.
SAN CLEMENTE—Far Nguyen Van Thieu it was a long‐sought opportunity —a week in the United States, chance to brush up his image here, a chance to demonstrate to the people at home how important he is. For Richard Nixon it was a duty performed a bit grudgingly—an invitation long delayed, a reception at the Western White House instead of the Washington greeting so eagerly sought by Mr. Thieu, a warm but relatively noncommittal welcoming speech.
WASHINGTON, April 7 (AP) —The Veterans Administration says that it will not attempt to recover $10,000 G.I. insurance payments made to wives or parents of five war prisoners who once were listed as dead.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., April 7—President Nixon sent one of his most trusted military Advisers to Indochina today in what was described as an effort to get a clearer picture of the deteriorating military situation in the region.
SAIGON, South, Vietnam—The United States has now withdrawn from direct involvement in the Vietnam conflict to assume a status approaching that of Russia or China in their proxy war. They give North Vietnam only logistical and political support.
Lieut. Col. Anthony B. Herbert, retired, “deceived the American people” when he said he had “a document” that proved that the Army was determined to destroy him because he had charged his superiors with failure to investigate his reports of war crimes, Senator Barry Goldwater has said.
STONEWALL, Tex., April 7 —President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam laid a wreath of yellow lilies and red roses at the grave of the late President Lyndon B. Johnson at the Johnson family cemetery near here today.
Brooklyn College is planning a major drive to inform veterans of the war in Vietnam in the borough that they are eligible for many of the services provided by the college even if they have not completed high school or were not discharged honorably. The college is seeking to reach 43,000 veterans.
WASHINGTON — In the spring of 1970 President Nixon provoked what he later was to describe as “an unprecedented barrage of criticism” by sending American troops into Cambodia. The stated purpose was to clear out North Vietnamese sanctuaries in that presumably neutral country and eliminate a military threat on South Vietnam's western flank.
WASHINGTON — It isn't only meat, or even just food. The truly dreary news on the inflation front last week was in a figure watched closely by economists but not widely familiar to consumers—the wholesale price index of industrial commodities. This index went up 1.2 per cent in March—the largest monthly increase since the Korean War inflation of 1951. What is worse, the index—which includes such diverse commodities as copper, machine tools, shirts and automobiles —rose for the first quarter of this year at an annual rate, of 10.3 per cent, a larger increase than in any quarter during the long Vietnam war inflation, which had seemed to cool off in late 1971 and 1972.
SACRAMENTO, Calif., April 7 (AP)—Joan Baez will refuse to pay part of her Federal income taxes again this year to protest military spending even though American troops have left Vietnam, the singer's business manager, Roy Kepler, said this week.
WASHINGTON, April 7—There is a kind of spring madness in Washington these days. The President and his men seem to be threatening all kinds of dreadful things they have no intention of doing, and their political opponents are promising all sorts of sensational retaliations they have no power to carry out.
GREENSBORO, N.C., April 2 —The students examined Norman McDaniel as if they had unearthed an intriguing fossil. They were taking part in a race relations seminar at North Carolina A. & T., and Maj. Norman McDaniel, United States Air Force, was a member of a nearly extinct sociological species: American Negro, circa 1966.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 8—A helicopter of the international peace‐keeping commission was believed to have been shot down yesterday in the northwestern corner of South Vietman near the border with Laos. Another helicopter flying with it was missing.
From Truce Commissions and 3 U.S. Crewmen Killed in 'Regrettable Accident' VIETCONG ADMIT DOWNING COPTER Site Believed Within Line Cautious Reaction at Home
PARIS, April 8 (Reuters)—The North Vietnamese Minister of State, Xuan Thuy, left here today for Hanoi after having headed his country's delegation to the four‐year peace talks that led to the Vietnam ceasefire agreement.
MONTEBELLO, Calif., April 8 (UPI) — More than a dozen motorcycle gang members tracked down and taunted an ailing Vietnam veteran early today, then hauled the 22‐year‐old former Army Sergeant from his car and stabbed him four times in the chest, the police reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 9—Six representatives of the two peace‐keeping commissions, including two Vietcong officers, were killed when their helicopter was shot down by a Communist missile Saturday, a Vietcong spokesman said last night. The three crewman of the copter, all Americans, also died.
WASHINGTON, April 8 (AP)——President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam said today that his country was concerned about the Cambodian situation. But when asked whether he was optimistic that there would be peace, he replied, “I'm very confident.”
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 8 (Agence France‐Presse) —Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of the Peking‐based Cambodian exile government, said today that he had visited “liberated areas” of Cambodia, had been there one and a half months and that the trip had been carried out in complete security.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 8—Three tankers and two cargo ships from an embattled convoy of 18 vessels reached this besieged capital late today with the first fuel that the city has received in two weeks.
A next to last word about the “Sticks and Bones” postponement on television may be in order because it affords a chance to see how governmental postures, communications structures and even philosophical considerations can determine what reaches the American people across almost the entire spectrum of the performing arts and of other acts of creativity—from TV and films to periodicals and books.
ROME, April 9 (AP)—While policemen and leftist demonstrators battled near St. Peter's Square, Pope Paul VI met President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam here today and urged hint to release political prisoners.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 10—Canada's highest‐ranking military official here has rejected Vietcong assertions that two helicopters carrying representatives of the international peace‐keeping commission were shot down Saturday because they had strayed off their prescribed course.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., April 9— Secretary General Waldheim has informed the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government that it may not open an office at the United Nations, qualified sources reported today.
Continuing Communist attacks against helicopters carrying peacekeeping observers over South Vietnam raise grave questions about the Vietcong contention that last Saturday's incident, in which four members of the International Commission of Control and Supervision were killed, was merely a “regrettable accident.” The emerging pattern suggests a deliberate attempt to sabotage the peacekeeping effort.
WASHINGTON, April 9 (AP) —President Nixon asked Cons gress today to appropriate $361‐million more for the 1973 fiscal year, including $1.5‐million to set up the new United States liaison office in Peking.
WASHINGTON, April 9 (UPI)—The nation's highestranking former prisoner of war says that the P.O.W.'s in North Vietnam learned to recognize and appreciate the “real pros” among the guards who tortured them.
LOS ANGELES, April 9 —knthony J. Russo Jr., one of the two defendants in the Pentagon papers trial, testified for the first time today and wept as he told how his feelings about the war in Vietnam, and finally his life, had been changed by a captured member of the Vietcong.
LOS ANGELES, April 9 —Anthony J. Russo Jr., one of the two defendants in the Pentagon papers trial, testified for the first time today and wept as he told how his feelings about the war in Vietnam, and finally his life, had been changed by a captured member of the Vietcong.
ROME, April 9 (Reuters)—Two men overpowered a police guard outside a U.S.O. club near the Vatican tonight and threw two gasoline bombs through the windows. The fire destroyed some furniture. The police said they believed that the attack was linked to the visit by the South Vietnamese President, Nguyen Van Thieu.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 10—All flights by helicopters of the International Commission of Control and Supervision have been temporarily suspended because of shooting incidents involving such aircraft, a commission source said this morning.
The daughter of Stalin, the former Svetlana Alliluyeva was sued for divorce in Phoenix, Ariz., by William W. Peters, chief architect at the Frank Lloyd. Wright Foundation's communal school, Taliesin West, at Scottsdale, Ariz. Mr. and Mrs. Peters, who were married, after a 20‐day courtship, on April 7, 1970, separated in December, 1971. At that time, Mrs. Peters, who is 47 years old, said she left her husband because she found life at the commune‐school oppressive, stating, “That's why I left Russia.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 11 (UPI)—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., President Nixon's special envoy, arrived from Phnom Penh, Cambodia, yesterday to find truceobserver activities here at standstill.
MANILA—Throughout non‐Communist Asia there has been a tendency in recent years to strengthen the executive power at the expense of the legislative and judiciary. One can see this trend in South Vietnam, South Korea, Thailand, Cambodia, Indonesia, Pakistan and most recently the Republic of the Philippines, where martial law was declared and Congress abolished last September.
WASHINGTON, April 10—Following the recent return of the last of 588 American prisoners of war from Southeast Asia, the Department of Defense has begun to try to determine the status of 1,328 men still listed as missing in action in the Indochina war.
BONN, April 10 (UPI)—Thousands of youths protesting a visit by the South Vietnamese President, Nguyen Van Thieu, today battled the police and stormed city hall in Bonn's most violent left‐wing demonstration in five years.

MOSCOW, April 11—David Rabe, the American playwright, was accused today of having written a letter attacking a Soviet version of his play “Sticks and Bones” because he lacked the courage to stand up to pressures from the Columbia Broadcasting System.
LOS ANGELES, April 11— Dr. Daniel Ellsberg testified today at the Pentagon papers trial that his feelings about the Vietnam war had been changed by such experiences as standing amid burning huts or watching schools built with American supplies turn to dust and “blow away” on the wind.
WASHINGTON, April 11 — The White House announced today that Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., President Nixon's special envoy to Indochina, would meet with the President tomorrow morning immediately upon returning from a four‐day assessment of the military situation in Southeast Asia.
Lieut. Col. Richard S. Schott, of Rockville, Md., who had been listed as missing in action in Vietnam for a year, has been declared dead by the Defense Department on the basis of information from American prisoners freed by the Vietcong.
At a White House dinner in his honor, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore toasted President Nixon with champagne and said he had discovered that the American news media were not sympathetic to the Nixon Administration. With celebrities such as Glenn Ford, Edgar Bergen and Bob Feller in attendance at the dinner, the Prime Minister said, “In the last few days in this country I have discovered that any statement, any argument, however dispassionate … which can be faintly, directly or indirectly construed as in support of, or in sympathy with, any of the hopes, policies or aspirations of this administration finds very scant space in the mass media.” Then Mr. Lee praised the President for “the cultured detachment of mind which enables you to pursue what is right in the long run, never mind what it is in the short run, whether it wins rapturous applause or otherwise.”
To the Editor: Our fervent hope and prayer is that all the antiwar zealots, like George McGovern, Jane Fonda, Ramsey Clark and Dr. Benjamin Spock, have the courage and the conscience to listen carefully to the poignant stories being told by our returning P.O.W.'s about their incredibly cruel and brutal torture by their fiendish Communist captors.

HANOVER, April 12—With strong persuasion from Chancellor Willy Brandt, his Social Democratic party tonight rejected a number of resolutions critical of the United States or opposed to American policy‥
WASHINGTON, April 12— Gen. Alexander M. Haig, Jr., just back from a special mission to Southeast Asia, reported to President Nixon this afternoon on the military situation in Cambodia, Laos and South Vietnam.
Five New Jersey peace activists, all in their 20's, were released yesterday on $7,500 bond each in York, Pa., for a May 7 hearing on charges of conspiracy and malicious mischief to railroads.
WASHINGTON, April 12 (UPI) — George Washington University has offered free courses to any prisoner of war returning from Vietnam who wants to study for a degree in the off‐campus program sponsored by the College of General Studies.


WASHINGTON—As the last U.S. soldier left Vietnam, most Americans believed and hoped that the event signaled the end of our military involvement in the longest, costliest and most divisive war in our history.
WASHINGTON, April 12—A civilian lawyer who aided in the Army's investigation of the My Lai 4 massacre said today that the pending retirement of Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers, who headed the inquiry, was “simply incredible.” He termed it a move adding to “the impression that the Army was not really serious about punishing those responsible.”
WASHINGTON, April 12 (UPI)—The Senate approved by voice vote today a resolution to authorize a memorial in Washington to Vietnam war veterans.
Frances FitzGerald, in accepting a National Book Award last night, said reports that she had been a prisoner of the Vietcong were greatly exaggerated.
HUE, South Vietnam, April 12 — The two truce‐supervision helicopters that were downed by the Vietcong near the Laos border last week had strayed more than 15 miles from their prearranged course, a team of investigators who returned from the crash site reported today. The investigators represented the International Commission of Control and Supervision.
TOKYO, April 12—The Japanese Government dispatched the Foreign Ministry's senior specialist on North Vietnam to Hanoi today in a major step toward establishing diplomatic relations between Tokyo and Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, April 12— Senator John C. Stennis, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, called today for the adoption of war‐powers legislation that be said would prevent the President from reintroducing military forces into Vietnam without Congressional consent.
PHNOM PENH, April 12— The chief mate of a cargo vessel that got through a Communist ambush on the South Vietnamese side of the border and sailed up the Mekong River to Phnom Penh accuses the South Vietnamese armed forces of failing to provide promised protection.
Twelve years ago President Kennedy dispatched a trusted military aide to Southeast Asia to assess a rapidly deteriorating military and political situation there. The recommendations brought back by Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor led to fateful steps into the quagmire from which this country has recently emerged, sadder but not necessarily wiser.
The White House said that President Nixon intended to nominate former Gov. Norbert T. Tiemann of Nebraska as Federal Highway Administrator. Mr. Tiemann, a Republican, who was Governor from 1967 to 1971, is expected to succeed Francis C. Turner in the highway post, which pays $42,500 a year. Also announced was the President's intention to nominate Vincent R. Barabba as Census Director. Mr. Barabba's Los Angeles research company did polling for the. Nixon re‐election campaign last year. The census job pays $36,000 a year.
DES MOINES, Iowa, April 13 (UPI)—On a unanimous vote, the Iowa House Appropriations Committee approved today legislation to award Vietnam veteran bonuses to 76,000 Iowans. The bill was a priority proposal of Gov. Robert D. Ray. Under the $28‐million proposal, veterans could receive $10 for each month of service in this country and $12.50 a month for overseas duty, with a maximum of $500 for each veteran. The $500 limitation would not apply to prisoners of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 13—The sound of live music has been stilled in Saigon only two weeks after the Government permitted it to be heard again.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 13 (AP) —Canada's peacekeeping delegation here charged today for the first time that North Vietnam was violating the Paris peace agreement by sending fresh troops into South Vietnam. Similar allegations were made by the United States.
WASHINGTON, April 13 — Nixon Administration officials are saying these days that they are concerned over the worsened military situation in Cambodia, angered by Hanoi's swift military build‐up in South Vietnam and distressed by the reluctance of the Soviet Uninn and China to do much to uphold the 76‐day ‐ old Vietnam cease ‐ fire agreement. But when asked what they plan to do, the officials equivocate. “We continue to assess the situation,” Ronald L. Ziegler, the White House press secretary, said again today, repeating what Henry A. Kissinger and others have been telling Congressmen, and newsmen for more than a week. “We have no deadline for action,” another aide said. “We can wait and see.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 14 — President Nguyen Van Thieu returned to Saigon from a two‐week world tour tonight and told a huge throng at Tan Son Nhut Airport that his trip “marked the end of a difficult period and the beginning of a new era of peaceful reconstruction” for South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON — The White House press secretary, Ronald L. Ziegler, was cryptic as to the reasons for Gen. Alexander. M. Haig's swing around Southeast Asia last week: The President's military troubleshooter was sent hurriedly on his mission because of “developments.” A senior Administration planner was a little more specific. The mission was both “a signal to Hanoi that the President was fast losing patience” and a move “to assess the situation.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 14—American officials believe that the Communists secretly moved two truce commission helicopters that they shot down last week, in order to back their explanation of the incident.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., April 14—The head of the United Nations Children's Fund has called for a $30‐million program of assistance for Indochina for 1973‐74.
WASHINGTON, April 14—Senator Edward M. Kennedy said today that a recent Senate study in Cambodia had concluded that about three million Cambodians—nearly half the population—had become refugoes since the American‐sponsored invasion of Cambodia three years ago.
Miss Robin Yvonne Smith, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Howard Smith of Rapid City, S.D., was married last evening to Sgt. Howard May, U.S.A.F., son of Mr. and Mrs. Irving May of Howard Beach, Queens. Rabbi Fredric S. Dworkin performed the ceremony at the Avenue R. Temple in Brooklyn. The bridegroom, a Vietnam veteran, is stationed at Ellsworth Air Force Base, S.D.
The Overseas Press Club is to present its rarest award, the President's Award, to the United States Committee of the International Committees to Free Journalists in Southeast Asia to spur the search for 20 newsmen missing in Cambodia and Vietnam.
South Vietnamese troops have pushed across the Cambodian border for the first time since a Vietnam cease‐fire went into effect two and a half months ago, according to reports from the field. Fighting was reported yesterday at two points along the border and hundreds of refugees, were said to have fled from Cambodia into South Vietnam. [Page 1, Column 8.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 16—South Vietnamese troops have pushed across the Cambodian border for the first time since a Vietnam cease‐fire went into effect two and a half months ago, according to reports from the field.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 15 (Canadian Press) —Michel Gauvin, head of the Canadian delegation to the International Commission of Control and Supervision, says it is essential that survivors of a crash of a commission helicopter be allowed to return to the area to verify the crash site.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 15—First the Americans concentrated on Vietnamization. Then they turned to civilianization. Now they are trying a little feminization.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 15—Knowledgeable Western diplomats here say that they believe that the heavy United States bombing campaign in Cambodia is being carried out on the basis of inadequate intelligence data and often with imprecise control, causing high civilian casualties.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 16—South Vietnamese troops have pushed across the Cambodian border for the first time since a Vietnam cease‐fire went into effect two and a half months ago, according to reports from the field.
WASHINGTON, April 15 —The Defense Department has reopened a controversy within the Administration by proposing to the White House that the foreign military aid program be consolidated within the overall defense budget
BANGKOK, Thailand, April 16 (UPI)—United States military spokesmen said today that a special American unit assigned to search for more than 1,300 American servicemen missing in Indochina would begin its task as soon as diplomatic permission was received from the countries involved. The spokesman said that organization of the Joint Casualty Resolution Center was 70 per cent completed and that more than 100 of 150 soldiers, assigned to the unit had arrived.
American bombers, for only the second time since the cease‐fire in Laos, struck North Vietnamese positions in that country yesterday, Pentagon officials said. Several dozen B‐52 bombers and F‐111 fighterbombers hit in and around the Laotian town of Tha Vieng on the southern edge of the Plaine des Jarres, after the town had reportedly been overrun by tanks and troops from North Vietnam. Word of the renewed bombing came amid reports that the Soviet Union had provided advanced SA‐3 antiaircraft missiles to North Vietnam for the first time, which could render any American decision to resume bombing in Laos more costly than ever before. [Page 1, Col. 8.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 17—A South Vietnamese military official said yesterday that Government troops “might” have crossed the border into Cambodia Sunday as newsmen on the scene reported.
WASHINGTON, April 16 — President Nixon came to the defense today of his Secretary of Labor. Peter J. Brennan, who has been under heavy attack from organized labor for supporting the Administration's new minimum wage legislation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 17—A four‐nation truce investigating team unanimously has agreed to ask the Vietcong to let survivors of the crash of a peacekeeping helicopter visit the wreckage to determine whether it was moved, Canadian sources said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 17—A South Vietnamese military official said yesterday that Government troops “might” have crossed the border into Cambodia Sunday as newsmen on the scene reported;
WASHINGTON, April 16 — American bombers, for only the second time since the ceasefire in Laos, today struck North Vietnamese positions in that country, Pentagon officials said.
WASHINGTON, April 17— United States B‐52 bombers struck at what were identified as North Vietnamese forces in Laos today for the second consecutive day in response to what Defense Secretary Elliot L. Richardson this morning called “a flagrant violation” of the Laotian ceasefire by Hanoi.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 17—Tin Song, the small daily newspaper that has often reflected the thinking of President Nguyen Van Thieu's Government, ceased publication today.
In 1969, when the nation was still in a state of shock over the wanton killing of women and children by American soldiers in Mylai, a major note of hope was the appointment of Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers to head an inquiry into the tragic affair. General Peers carried out a vigorous and unsparing investigation, and in 1970 established that “a tragedy of major proportions” had indeed occurred in the ill‐fated Vietnamese hamlet.
WASHINGTON, April 17— Defense Secretary Elliot L. Richardson defended today a nationwide reduction of military bases as a “necessary and timely” economy measure in the wake of the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON — The sign outside headquarters, Military Assistance Command Vietnam, read: “Will the last man out please turn off the lights?”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April I8—Informed Western sources expressed strong doubt yesterday that the South Vietnamese army was planning a major thrust into Cambodia
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Wednesday, April 18 — President Lon Nol announced the resignation of the Government headed by Premier Hang Thun Hak last night. [The United States bombing of Laos went into its second day, with B‐52's striking at what were identified as North Vietnamese forces in response to what Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson termed “a flagrant violation” of the Laotian ceasefire. Page 14.]
Two Nixon Administration cabinet members, George P. Shultz Secretary of the Treasury, Earl L. Butz, Secretary of Agriculture, gave separate, and not necessarily similar views of the rising costs of food Mr. Shultz said that weather plays a role in food supply and that “every morning, the first thing I do ... is turn to the weather report to see how they're doing out there in the Midwest . . . the weather has been foul and the wage and price system can't cure that problem.”
HONG NGU, South Vietnam, April 18 (Reuters)—A convoy of empty supply barges sailed through a Communist ambush attempt on the Mekong River while returning from Cambodia today, but heavier fighting is expected before the river banks are cleared.
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 18 (Reuters)—A Government official said today that United States planes would continue bombing Communist forces if Pathet Lao and North Vietnamese troops continued their offensive in northeastern Laos.
Carl Stokes, former Cleveland Mayor turned television newsman, will lose his co‐anchorman on WNBC‐TV here. He will remain as an anchorman on the National Broadcasting Cornpany's local 6 P.M. news show, and Paul Udell, his partner, will become an N.B.C. correspondent and may be assigned to Vietnam. The Stokes‐Udell team has been on the air for nearly a year and has run a consistent third to the shows on WCBS‐TV and WABC‐TV.
LOS ANGELES, April 18 — Daniel Ellsberg completed his testimony in the Pentagon papers trial today, telling the jury that the documents contained 1,000 pages depicting American war crimes and illegal actions — not by the troops in Vietnam, but by high Government officials.
WASHINGTON, April 18—The United States has told Poland to postpone a visit here by Deputy Premier Jan Mitrega because
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 18 (Reuters)—Fighting in South Vietnam remained at a relatively low level today, with the military command here reporting a rise in Communist violations of the cease‐fire from yesterday, but no significant attacks.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 18—The Information Minister directed foreign newsmen today to refer to enemy troops in future dispatches not merely as “Communist forces” but as “Vietnamese Communists.”
With “The Orphan,” which opened last night at the Anspacher Theater of the New York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater complex, David Rabe brings his “Vietnam trilogy” to completion. The three plays, “The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel,” “Sticks and Bones” and “The Orphan”— all produced by Joseph Papp and directed by Jeff Bleckner — have very much in common.
PHILADELPHIA, April 18— The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit declared today that two key provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice that led to the court‐martial conviction of an antiwar Army physican, Capt. Howard B. Levy, six years ago were so vague as to be unconstitutional.
United States bombers rain death on Cambodia, South Vietnamese troops sally across the Cambodian border, American bombers strike intermittently in Laos —it has all the aspect of the rerun of a bad movie.
WASHINGTON, April 19 —The United States announced today the suspension of all mine‐clearing operations along the coast of North Vietnam and the recall of the chief American official in the Paris negotiations on possible reconstruction aid to the North.
The United States announced yesterday that it had suspended mine‐clearing operations along the North Vietnamese coast, a move Administration officials said was aimed at halting what they said were North Vietnamese violations of the cease‐fire agreement. Similarly, it was announced that the United States had recalled its chief negotiator from the Paris discussions on possible post‐war American reconstruction aid to North Vietnam. [Page 1, Column 1.]
As he arrived in Peking, President Luis Echeverria Alvarez of Mexico received a handshake from Premier Chou En‐lai a welcome from thousands of dancing schoolgirls and became the first head of a. Latin American state to visit China since the Communists took power there in 1948. Mr. Echeverria was scheduled for several talks with the Premier, and perhaps one with Chairman Mao Tse‐tung. In an interview with Mexican journalists, Premier Chou said that Chairman Mao, who is 79 years old, “is in good health. He has a lot of work” and “dedicates himself to reading.”
WASHINGTON, April 19— The United States announced today the suspension of all mine‐clearing operations along the coast of North Vietnam and the recall of the chief American official in the Paris negotiations on possible reconstruction aid to the North.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 20 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese Navy has apprehended a Thai fishing boat carrying from two to three tons of narcotics, a United States Embassy spokesman said today.
WASHINGTON, April 20— The United States has resumed military reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam, despite the ban on such activity in the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement, officials of the State and Defense Departments said today.
The late Senator William H. Benton has urged in his will that his family “not yield to the Wall Street son of the Pied Piper” and allow the Encyclopedia Britannica to become a public corporation.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 20 — Official American sources here said today that since the Vietnam cease ‐ fire three months ago, there has been no documented evidence that Vietnamese Communist troops are serving in combat roles in Cambodia.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 20 — Official American sources here said today that since the Vietnam cease ‐ fire three months ago, there has been no documented evidence that Vietnamese Communist troops are serving in combat roles in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, April 20— The United States has resumed military reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam, despite the ban on such activity in the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement, officials of the State and Defense Departments said today.
WASHINGTON, April 21 (AP) — The Senate majority leader, Mike Mansfield, secretly advised two Presidents in the nineteen‐sixties to restrain, rather than extend, United States involvement in the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, April 21 (AP) —The United States has distributed to the members of the Paris conference that guaranteed the Vietnam peace agreement a note accusing North Vietnam and the Vietcong of violating the accord.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 21—The largest private bank in South Vietnam was closed by the Government today and its managing director —a pro‐Government member of the National Assembly and the president of the chamber of commerce here — was charged with using vast amounts of depositors' funds for his own purposes.
Joyce Maynard is 20 years old. She goes to Yale. Perhaps the single most significant fact of her life is that 5,000 hours of it — by her reckoning—have been spent in front of the TV. (That's only four hours a day for three years, and from the way she describes the TVwatching habits of herself and her contemporaries — languid omnivores — it was probably a lot more than that.) The big events of her childhood were the televised public crises and accomplishments: J.F.K.'s assassination, civil‐rights marches, riots, space shots, the Vietnam war. She watched boring sitcoms for hypnotic relief and because “they made the eventlessness of my own life . . . seem comfortingly acceptable,” and Dr. Kildare for the morbid thrills of death and disease.
WASHINGTON—The United States, which has been accusing the North Vietnamese with growing asperity of violating the Paris cease‐fire agreement, did some violating of its own last week—as a “signal” to Hanoi.
GENEVA, April 21 — The Swiss Government has announced that it has budgeted $4.5‐million for relief and rehabilitation aid to North Vietnam and South Vietnam over the next two years.
Daniel Ellsberg, on the 71st day of his trial, last Monday got to tell the jury why he had disclosed the Pentagon papers. The reason, he said, was “to give Congress the confidence to act” to end the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 21 (AP)—A Vietcong official announced today that permission would be given to the international peace ‐ keeping force to re‐examine the wreckage of the helicopter that crashed on April 7, killing nine persons.
ALLOWAY, N. J., April 22—Maj. Joseph S. Abbott Jr., who spent the last five Easters in the “Hanoi Hilton,” decorated eggs with his wife and seven children this weekend and sat down with them today to a baked ham and a bunnycake with “ears” lined with pink coconut.
PINE RIDGE, S.D., April 22 —Assistant Attorney General J. Stanley Pottinger has compared the deteriorating situation at the occupied hamlet of Wounded Knee on the Oglala, Sioux reservation with that of Vietnam.
Amid growing public concern over the Watergate affair, the Gallup Poll reports, President Nixon's popularity has fallen 14 per tentage points since the late January Vietnam peace settlement and five points alone in the first week of April.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 24—Fighting in South Vietnam during the last few days has declined to its lowest level since the Jan. 28 cease‐fire took effect, Saigon and American officials reported yesterday.
Those who are out of work in a time of prosperity suffer psychological misery as well as economic misfortune. Despite the distinct economic improvement the last year, 5 per cent of the work force is still unemployed. That statistic stands for 4.5 million persons including 300,000 Vietnam war veterans and about half‐million persons who have been seeking work for six months or longer, the so‐called “hard‐core unemployed.”
WASHINGTON, April 23 —The Defense Department estimated today that of 300,000 Army enlisted men who served in Vietnam between 1970 and 1972, fewer than 4,000 are civilian drug addicts.
WASHINGTON, April 23 —The State Department said today that North Vietnamese forces were training and supplying anti‐Government insurgents in Cambodia and manning heavy weapons there.
Henry A. Kissinger sharply assailed North Vietnam yesterday for having “totally violeted” the Vietnam cease ‐ fire agreement.
Bernadette Devlin, the firebrand member of the British Parliament who has championed the cause of Roman Catholics in Northern Ireland, was married yesterday on her 26th birthday. Miss Devlin, who gave birth to a daughter 21 months ago but has refused to name the child's father, was married in a Catholic ceremony at Rock, near Cookstown, Northern Ireland, to Michael McAlaskey. Her husband, a 24‐year‐old schoolmaster, is believed to be a member of the Official, or Marxist‐oriented, wing of the Irish Republican Army. The marriage was the first for both.
WASHINGTON, April 23 —The Defense Department estimated today that of 300,000 Army enlisted men who served in Vietnam between 1970 and 1972, fewer than 4,000 are civilian drug addicts.
A State Department spokesman has compounded the confusion that shrouds everything about military operations in Cambodia by insisting that North Vietnamese troops are actively supporting insurgents fighting around Phnom Penh. Only last week, an American Embassy official in the Cambodian capital asserted that there had been no documentary evidence of Vietnamese troops in combat in Cambodia since the Vietnamese cease‐fire.
There are ominous hints of impending new United States military action in Indochina in Henry A. Kissinger's charge before The Associated Press meeting that North Vietnam has “totally violated” the Vietnam ceasefire agreement, an accusation that was backed up yesterday by a formal protest to signatories of the Paris peace accords.
WASHINGTON, April 24—The United States made public today a sharply worded reply to Hanoi's charges of ceasefire violations, accusing the North Vietnamese of “direct and inexcusable” breaches of the three‐month‐old Vietnam accord.
WASHINGTON, April 24—The United States made pubilic today a sharply worded reply to. Hanoi's charges of ceasefire violations, accusing the North Vietnamese of “direct and inexcusable” breaches of the three‐month‐old Vietnam accord.
WASHINGTON, April 24—Following, as made public by the State Department today, are the texts of notes distributed to the countries that participated in the recent Paris conference on Vietnam, by North Vietnam on April 16 and by the United States over last weekend:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 24 (Reuters) — A bomb explosion in a crowded restaurant yesterday killed five people and wounded 11, the military command reported today.
WASHINGTON, April 24—The Nixon re‐election organization attempted last May to generate a favorable public response to the President's decision to mine Haiphong harbor in North Vietnam, The Washington Post reported tonight.
SAIGON, Wednesday, April 25 (Reuters) — The release of the first civilian prisoners of war in Vietnam was delayed today by a dispute between the Vietcong and South Vietnamese over their release sites.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—Some of South Vietnam's primitive Montagnard hill tribes, who traditionally weave into their fabrics the events around them, are now incorporating into standard designs all the accoutrements of modern warfare.
PARIS, April 25—The rival South Vietnamese regimes traded new plans for a political settlement here today, just two days before the end of the 90‐day period set by the ceasefire agreement for a solution to their dispute.
MONTGOMERY, Ala. April 25 (UPI)—The Air Force announced yesterday that 235 former prisoners of war will begin attending classes at Maxwell Air Force Base April 30 to bring them up to date on world and cultural affairs.
WASHINGTON, April 25 —The White House announced today that Henry A. Kissinger would return to Paris in midMay for talks with Hanoi's chief negotiator, Le Due Tho, on ways to achieve “strict implementation” of the much‐via lated Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
MINNEAPOLIS, April 25 (AP) — Critics of Honeywell, Inc., led by clergymen and church laity, peppered management at the annual meeting today but failed to push through a resolution to get the company out of some of its military business.
PARIS, April 25—The Vietcong and the Saigon Government traded new plans here today for a political settlement in South Vietnam, just two days before the end of the 90‐day period set by the cease‐fire agreement for a solution to their dispute.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 25 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese Government warned foreign newsmen today that they faced arrest if they entered Vietcong‐controlled areas without permission from the Saigon authorities.
PENSACOLA, Fla., April 25 (AP)—Former Attorney General John N. Mitchell testified in Federal court here tonight that he knew of no efforts by the Committee for the Re‐election of the President to tap telephone conversations by members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 25—A Government military spokesman said today that Saigon and the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Vietcong had agreed to an exchange of civilian prisoners beginning Friday.
WASHINGTON, April 25—will cite the Republicans' 1972 campaign organization for the second time for criminal violations of the financial disclosure law, it was learned today. The charges involve unreported expenditures designed to demonstrate purportedly spontaneous public support for one of President Nixon's most controversial military decisions in Vietnam.
The decision of Washington and Hanoi to send their chief negotiators back to Paris to try to salvage the crumbling Paris peace accords marks a welcome shift from the recriminations and threats that have been filling the air in recent days.
“If you are willing to pay the higher taxes or prices that will result if we increase the Federal spending over my bud?? get, as some in Congress have proposed, you should ash you. Senators and your Congress men to override my vetoes....”
WASHINGTON, April 26 (UPI)—The Defense Department today identified the first American killed in Cambodia since the Vietnam cease‐fire. He was First Lieut. Joseph Gambino Jr. of the Air Force, son of Joseph Gambino Sr. of the Bronx. Lieutenant Gambino was the pilot of an OV‐10 propeller‐driven lookout plane shot down April 7.
WASHINGTON, April 26 —L. Patrick Gray 3d, acting director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has told friends that he destroyed documents taken from a central figure in the Watergate case after it was suggested at a White House meeting that the papers “should never see the light of day.”
PARIS, April 26 (Reuters) —A high State Department official, William H. Sullivan, arrived in Paris today to prepare the ground with the North Vietnamese for talks next month between the architects of the Vietnam peace agreement, Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho.
STOCKHOLM, April 26—The Swedish Government, long a critic of American involvement in Indochina, condemned the United States today for its bombing of Cambodia, charging that the raids “indiscriminately hit the civilian population.”
PARIS, April 25—Three months after the Vietnam cease‐fire, the fundamental issues of the Indochina conflict remain as sharp as ever and the firing has not ceased.
WASHINGTON, April 27—A document purporting to be a 10‐year‐old State Department cable dealing with American policy toward former South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem was in the possession of E. Howard Hunt Jr., the convicted Watergate conspirator, in the summer of 1971.
WASHINGTON, April 27 —North Vietnam appeared to raise doubts today that its chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho, would meet in Paris with Henry A. Kissinger in mid‐May, as announced two days ago by the White House. But a senior White House official insisted that “we have a written commitment” from Hanoi and a “firm date” for the meeting.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 27 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese Government announced today that it was permitting Saigon journalists to attend press briefings given by the Vietcong.
WASHINGTON, April 27—A Senate subcommittee today made public previously secret Defense Department information officially confirming that the preponderance of American bombing in Cambodia shifted since last month from striking at North Vietnamese lines, of communication to supporting Cambodian Government forces.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, April 28 (Reuters) —The South Vietnamese Government and the Vietcong blamed each other yesterday for 12,000 violations of the cease‐fire in which more than 25,000 soldiers and civilians are reported to have been killed since Jan. 28.
MERIDIAN, Miss., April 27—President Nixon took a respite from his Watergate troubles today and flew to an air naval station near here where he was cheered by a crowd of several thousand and encouraged by Senator John C. Stennis to “tough it out.”
Three months after the signing of truce in Vietnam; the United States is still at war. Not only is the end not in sight, but each day brings new intimations that the Administration is ready for heightened combat in, Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 28 (UPI)—South Vietnam and the Vietcong exchanged 163 civilian prisoners today, the deadline stipulated in the ceasefire agreement for an exchange that is supposed to involve 1,387 prisoners.
LOS ANGELES — The Pentagon papers case had been characterized as an attempt to put the Vietnam war on trial. It had raised major constitutional issues involving freedom of the press. As a continuing claimant to national attention, it was overshadowed only by the Watergate scandal. But incredibly, on the 80th day of the trial of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony J. Russo Jr., the Pentagon Papers case and the Watergate case merged in Federal court here.
WASHINGTON — North Vietnam charged the United States with “brazenly and systematically” rupturing the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement. Washington responded by accusing Hanoi of “direct and inexcusable” breaches in the three‐months‐ old accord. American reconnaissance planes again flew over North Vietnam — a none‐too‐subtle warning of a possible renewal of American bombing.
WASHINGTON—Small wonder that Theodore H. White has postponed his deadline for writing “The Making of the President 1972.” For as investigators continue to lift that great flat rock called “Watergate,” they expose not simply the Watergate crime but a swarming campaign netherworld never fully seen before.
MOORESTOWN — The executive vice president of RCA Government and Commercial Systems, one of the largest employers in Southern New Jersey, says that a decline in business that cut its work force by 5,568 persons in the last three years has “bottomed out,” and that the end of the Vietnam war is having a “bullish” effect.
To the Editor: Now that the U.S. combat role in Vietnam is terminated, it is time to consider reviving some of the serious casualties of that adventure. One of these is a serious commitment to the use and development of the U.N. so that it may become a responsible and effective basis for a civilized international system of law and order. American concepts of freedom and justice lose their meaning in a world which bases its international relations on the war system, as is now the regrettable fact.
I can accept the assertions that Hitler and Stalin were probably “insane,” but I am drawn up short by the statement in Dr. Willard Gaylin's article (“In matters mental or emotional, What's normal?” April 1), that “it is conceivable that Abraham Lincoln was a manic‐depressive psychotic, as has been suggested by some historians.”
“The soldier going to South Vietnam today runs a far greater risk of becoming a heroin addict than a combat casualty,” declared Representative Robert H. Steele in the spring of 1971. Shocking estimates of the number of GI junkies—as high as 78,000 men—abounded.
WASHINGTON, April 28 —President Nixon was reported to be in “virtual seclusion” today at his mountaintop retreat at Camp David, Md., pondering his course of action amid the mounting Watergate bugging controversy.
LOS ANGELES, April 29—“Everybody says we had nothing to do, but we did have something to do, we had an obligation to fulfill,” Lieut. Col. Alan Lurie said recently. “That was to follow the Code of Conduct, to resist the North Vietnamese attempts to exploit us. And that was full‐time job in that situation.”
LOS ANGELES, April 29—“Everybody says we had nothing to do, but we did have something to do, we had an obligation to fulfill,” Lieut. Col. Alan Lurie said recently. “That was to follow the Code of Conduct, to resist the North Vietnamese attempts to exploit us. And that was a full‐time job in that situation.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 29 (AP)—The Saigon command today reported 74 cease‐fire violations across South Vietnam during the 24‐hour period ended at 6 A.M., the second lowest number since the truce went into effect three months ago.
SAIGON, April 29 (Reuters) —South Vietnam has lowered the value of its currency to 485 piastres to the United States dollar from 475 piastres, effective Immediately.
PARIS, April 29 (Reuters)—William H. Sullivan, the United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, and Nguyen Co Thach, the North Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister met for five and a half hours today in their second session of talks here in three days.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 31 (UPI) — President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that almost one year of the “so‐called cease‐fire” had not ended the war in South Vietnam and that Communist forces were preparing for an offensive.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 31—There is a strange gap of perception between those who live in Vietnam and many public figures who talk about it from a distance.
Cambridge University has appointed Archibald Cox, recently dismissed by President Nixon as the special Watergate prosecutor, Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions. The job requires him to visit Cambridge at least once, sometime after next October, to deliver a lecture or course of lectures. Mr. Cox is on leave from his law professorship at Harvard.
WEST POINT, N. Y., Oct. 31—They still call the Saturday night dances “hops,” and cannon search the bend in the Hudson River where the British navy once tried to enter.
"The Films of Danny Lyon," the new program at the Film Forum, is a collection of three documentary films by the 31-year-old Brooklyn-born still photographer turned film-maker. The two best films in the collection, "Llanito" (61 minutes) and "Soc. Sci. 127" (21 minutes) are defined less by a developed cinematic style than by compassion for the subjects."Llanito" is a sorrowful montage of scenes of Indian life in the tiny New Mexico town of that name. It is not an especially finished film, but perhaps Mr. Lyon does not mean it to be.A couple of Indian men, half-kidding, dance around a beer can in a back alley. We listen to another man boast to the camera about his prowess as a hunter, while his mother mutters that the only thing he is good at is drinking.Juxtaposed against these scenes are others set in a home for the retarded, where, among other things, we listen to a white teen-age boy, who speaks in a high falsetto voice, telling us about freedom, sin, the crucifixion of Christ and the creation of the world ("God made everything out of nothing").Mr. Lyon's fondness for bizarre images is balanced by a kind of solemn respect for his subjects. This is particularly true in "Soc. Sci. 127," about an eccentric, hard-drinking tattoo artist named Bill Sanders, who, while he works, rambles on about Vietnam, lesbians and the art of what he advertises as "velvety tattoos."The third film on the program, "El Chivot" (The Goat) is a series of free associations on the life of goat and Indian. It runs six long, pretentious minutes.Mr. Lyon's skills as a photographer are evident throughout but I had the feeling in each of the films that he was still searching his images to find out what they might mean. This is not quite good enough.
PHUONG DANH, South Vietnam — The dirt road is flanked by the clatter of hammers on steel. Throbbing charcoal fires glow and spit sparks. Men and their wives and their sons and daughters, faces glistening with sweat, pound chunks of red‐hot metal, beating, shaping, forging farm tools from the tools of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 2 — Thousands of South Vietnamese celebrated the memory of President Ngo Dinh Diem with reverence today, a day after national celebrations marking the anniversary of the military coup d'état in 1963 in which he was assassinated.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 3 (AP)—The micromini and the braless look are disappearing from the streets of Saigon.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 3 —Vietnam veterans in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut are taking significantly less advantage of the educational benefits of the G.I. Bill of Rights than their counterparts across the country. On a per capita basis, for example, California veterans have received nearly twice as much in benefits New York's.
The visible disintegration of President Nixon's moral and political authority, of his capacity to act as Chief Executive, of his claim to leadership and to credibility leads us to the reluctant conclusion that Mr.. Nixon would be performing his ultimate service to the American people—and to himself—by resigning his office before this nation is forced to go through the traumatic and divisive process of impeachment.
AT THE ONG BO BRIDGE, South Vietnam, Oct. 26—At 10 minutes to 1 this morning a shuddering black column of mud, steel and water rose out of the sinuous Trau River, which is framed by placid rice paddies and dimpled with water lilies.
SIOUX FALLS, S. D., Nov. 3 (AP)—A Vietnam war veteran, who says his six years in a prisoner‐of‐war camp showed him lie was “lucky to be born an American,” has announced, his intention to run for they United States Senate or House in 1974. Leo K. Thorsness of Sioux Falls, a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel, said Thursday he would seek the Republican nomination for one of those seats.
Puerto Rican veterans, returning from Vietnam are entitled to the same benefits as any serviceman, but because of their language barriers and generally limited educations they have found it much more difficult than other veterans to get the advice needed to adjust to civilian life.
PARIS, Nov. 3 (Reuters)—The Vietcong have rejected charges by President Nguyen Van Thieu that they and North Vietnam were preparing a general offensive in the South.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 3—The Vietcong said today that they had no intention of initiating an offensive against the South Vietnamese Government early next year, as President Nguyen Van Thieu recently predicted.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 5 (Reuters)—Three persons were killed and 22 wounded last night in a bomb explosion at a restaurant in the Mekong Delta. The South Vietnamese military command reported that the explosion had occurred in a village on the outskirts of Ben Tre, capital of Kien Hoa Province. He said the bomb was planted by Vietcong guerrillas, who have been waging a campaign in the delta for the past month.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 4. — North Vietnamese tanks and troops attacked and seized two Government camps, near the Cambodian border today after a day‐long battle that was described by the military command in Saigon as one of the most savage since the Jan. 28 cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 5—North Vietnamese tanks and troops attacked and seized two Government camps near the Cambodian border yesterday after day‐long battle that was described by the military command in Saigon as one of the most savage since the Jan. 28 cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Nov. 6 — South Vietnamese planes strafed and bombed North Vietnamese fromations yesterday around two Government militia outposts near the Cambodian border that on Sunday were overwhelmed by tanks, the South Vietnamese command announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 5—The history examinations in South Vietnam's public schools contain no questions on the American role here, nothing about North Vietnam and no mention of the VietGong.
ENGLEWOOD, N.J., Nov. 6 (AP)—A referendum to ask Congress to grant amnesty to Vietnam draft evaders was approved 2,933 to 2,812 in this affluent Bergen County community today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 7—The Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government said in an unusually frank statement yesterday that it had attacked Bien Hoa air base, near Saigon, with rockets to retaliate for recent air strikes originating at the base against Communist positions.
The South Vietnamese military command said yesterday that its planes had bombed two Communist‐held areas north of Saigon in what it described as its largest air strike since the signing of the cease‐fire agreement in January. Page 5.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 7—She writes in careful detail about the cultural degradation that South Vietnam suffered under the Americus, daughters turned into whores and rent‐a‐wives, whole families dedicating themselves to trafficking in stolen post‐exchange goods, an artificial, competitive prosperity disrupting marriages, friendships and social relationships.
DURHAM, N. C.—Suddenly everybody and his uncle is raising the question of Mr. Nixon's fitness as person—to be President. For 27 years, Richard Nixon has been trying to tell us the answer. That what moves and excites him is not principle or policy or result, but an endless struggle for control. First to control himself. He is and has been—at least since 1946 —a man who seemed to be hounded by the self‐imposed “temptation” to let his enemies have it, to “get” them, to let all his dammed‐up anger find release in some glorious outburst.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 7—In October, 1969, H. R. Haldeman, President Nixon's chief of staff, ordered White House aides to organize a campaign of letters, telegrams and telephone calls. to Senators Charles E. Goodell of New York, Charles McCMathias Jr. of Maryland and Charles H. Percy of Illinois, all Republicans, “blasting them on their consistent opposition to the President.”
If disbelief is one of our healthiest national reflexes, at least it has been well exercised in the years between the Warren Report and the latest protestations about the nonbeing of those Presidential tapes. The only danger is that fact itself can be a victim of disbelief: Ugly news that happens to be true becomes easier to ignore, and good news gets rejected with a cackle."Executive Action," which opened yesterday at the Coronet, offers a tactful, low-key blend of fact and invention. The film makers do not insist that they have solved John Kennedy's murder; instead, they simply evoke what might have happened, according to various researchers, including Mark Lane.The result is a cool, skillful, occasionally confusing argument for conspiracy. Wealthy rightwingers (Burt Lancaster and Robert Ryan) wanted Kennedy removed because he was going to sign the test-ban treaty, "lead the black revolution" and probably pull out of Vietnam. The last two points may give you the hiccups, but that is what these characters say.Like calm businessmen, they organize the event. While three talented marksmen rehearse by shooting at dummies in a car driven through the desert, the conspirators search for a nut to use as a patsy.Throughout the stress is on technology — even Oswald's name comes out of a computer. The movie follows the "second Oswald" theory, and this part of the plot is deftly constructed, as is the disappearance of the three marksmen, also the calculations to "have the F.B.I. watching the C.I.A." and vice versa, while relying on the inefficiency of the Secret Service.The conspirators are cleverly cloaked in the style of Camelot itself. Lancaster and Ryan appear as pensive, practical semi-academics, rationally planning an act as bloody as a small foreign invasion. (They admit that they sometimes "sound like gods," since they are also planning the world's future — "Well, somebody's got to do it.") Both have the confidence and the casual class that we recall in many Kennedy appointees. Lancaster, looking miraculously young, overdoes the "sincerity" at moments—an old habit of his. And there are too many shots of the conspirators smiling ironically at once another. But Ryan is wonderfully benign and wry, wisely underplaying where others might have gone all out for evil.However, it is far more painful to think of Ryan's death — a few weeks after this movie was finished — than Kennedy's. And that is the problem lurking in this movie. Television footage is used to paw at the public's sentiments; we see Kennedy smiling and golfing and kissing his children, as well as making speeches. But "Executive Action" is emotionally disconnected from history to the degree that those with an affection for suspense can enjoy the build-up of the plotting — even though we know how the assassination turned out.Despite the flags crawling down flagpoles and the drumbeats, a national trauma has become a competent thriller. And it is just as well. Reliving the shock of that killing would hardly benefit any kind of audience now.So whether you chime with this interpretation, or, like a few I know, decide to embrace all the conspiracy theories of the assassination, the movie is useful in rousing the questions once again. The film's sternest and strongest point is that only a crazed person acting on his own would have been acceptable to the American public — which, at that time, certainly did not want to believe in a conspiracy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 8 — The South Vietnamese military command said yesterday that its planes had bombed two Communistheld areas north of Saigon in what the command described as its largest air strike since the signing of the cease‐fire agreement in January.
The South Vietnamese military command said yesterday that its planes had bombed two Communist‐held areas north of Saigon in what it described as its largest air strike since the signing of the cease‐fire agreement in January. Page 5.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 8 (AP)—The Vietcong asserted today that their forces had decisively defeated Government troops along the Cambodian border over the weekend, and also accused the Saigon Government of inflicting more than 100 civilian casualties during an air strike.
OAKLAND, Calif.— The apartment we had shared was right on Tu Do Street, so I had to walk past it several times a day. Sometimes, I would find myself sitting there in the coffee shop across the street, just staring up at the two big windows as if waiting for a familiar face to pop out of memory (dreams, and nightmares) and say, “Hey, man, come on up and let's get stoned.”
To the Editor:
TEMPE, Ariz.—When I wrote the letters that eVentually led to the public revelation of the My Lai massacre, I hoped for many things. Chief among them was that, it would show the American people and their Government that the policies of force abroad and deception at home were not only antithetical to the principles of a democratic society brit low, mean, stupid, brutal and self‐destructive as well.
GIA NGHIA, South Vietnam, Nov. 9 — Communist forces have apparently cut all roads leading to this provincial capital in the Central Highlands 105 miles northeast of Saigon.
LONG TRACH, South Vietnam. Mrs. Nguyen Thi Le, a slight, stooped peasant woman, lives alone in her large brick house now, surrounded only by endless fields of green rice ripening under the relentless sun. Many years ago—she does not recall exactly—she shared the house and worked in the fields with a husband and five sons. They have all been claimed by the war, and, more recently, by what is called peace.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 (AP) —Plans to establish a research institute of agricultural botany in North Vietnam to help Indochina recover from the effects of deforestation and other war damages were disclosed this week by a group of American scientists.
PEKING, Nov. 10—Secretary of State Kissinger, his attention turned away from the Middle East, arrived in Peking today and assured Premier Chou Enlai that the United States was determined “to complete the process” of normalizing relations with China as rapidly as possible.
DURING the darkest days of the sixties, those days when it seemed that the Vietnam war would never end and the war on poverty was grinding to a halt, those of us who were involved in the movements to change our country's policies from within the existing political system began to wonder if we weren't wasting our time, and—along with our time—the lives of all those people. to whom we had pledged ourselves. It was during those lonely moments that frustration replaced hope, sand we began to talk of revolution.
Mr. and Mrs. Nguyen Van Tang of Saigon, South Vietnam, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Miss Nguyen Thi Chung, to Anthony P. X. Bothwell of Miami. The wedding is planned for late, next month.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10—Following are some of the observations Made on various issues over the years by Gerald R. Ford, the nominee for Vice President:
Art Buchwald's new book, “I Never Danced at the White House,” a collection of his most recent columns, will never adorn the bookshelves of the Oval Office, just as Buchwald himself will probably never two‐step in the East Room. Although the book ranges over such subjects as Women's Lib, food prices, the detente with China, the McGovern debacle and sex, Buchwald reserves his most pungent satire for Vietnam and Watergate. Many of the more than 140 essays deal with those two issues and one senses that Buchwald is not just milking popular themes, but is sincerely outraged at the current Administration.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10—In his confirmation hearings for Vice President, Gerald R. Ford was asked how he would classify himself politically.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 (AP) — The search for Americans missing in Indochina is slowing and Pentagon officials say it may be cut short in a few months.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 11 (AP)—The Vietcong charged today that dozens of people had been killed or wounded in a Government “extermination bombing” of the Communist‐held town of Lo Go, 70 miles northwest of Saigon.
BINH HOA, South Vietnam—It has been nearly seven years since American troops suddenly surrounded the prosperous village of Ben Suck forced its residents into a barren make‐shift camp 20 miles away and then burned, bombed and bulldozed the village out of existence.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 14—The Goveminent said today that a violent storm struck six coastal provinces over the weekend, killing at least 51 persons, forcing evacuation of at least 145,000 and flooding several cities with waters as deep as 10 feet.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13—A Federal court judge ordered the Department of Defense today to notify about 3,400 Vietnam‐era veterans who received less‐thanhonorable discharges that they were entitled to a review and possible upgrading to an honorable discharge. The veterans were discharged for drug abuse before a change in defense policy in 1971.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13—New York City's Congressional delegation today resolved to seek in “emergency meeting” with the Veterans Administration to ease the plight of the city's 350,000 Vietnam veterans.
BUBLINGTON, Vt.—My husband is one of those who refused to join the Army during the Vietnam war. John is not a “draft dodger,” lie never made any attempt to run or hide from legal authorities in this country. On the contrary, he remained at home and worked steadily from the time of his initial refusal to join the Army (two and one‐half years ago) until he left for prison. His record was so good that the judge allowed him one week after sentencing to make arrangements for Eric (our son) and me before reporting to prison. It is obvions that John is not a dangerous person. It is inconceivable that any man who refuses to join the Army for moral reasons, knowing that a refusal means a prison sentence, could be considered dangerous. John refused to join the Army because he believes it is morally wrong to kill and wrong to be any part of an organization designed for the destruction of human lives.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 14—A Senate‐House conference committee agreed today on legislation that would authorize $2.4‐billion in foreign economic and military aid in the fiscal year ending next July 1, or about $400‐million less than requested by the Administration.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 14 (Reuters)—South Vietnam today devalued the Master from 525 to 535 to the United States dollar in the eighth devaluation this year.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 12—Early in the morning, when the streets of Saigon were splashed with sunlight, three 16‐year‐old boys tried to become soldiers.
With Election Day, 1973, barely out of the way, Gov. George C. Wallace of Alabama drew the first announced opposition to his plans to win re‐election. State Senator Eugene McLain of Huntsville, a 42‐year‐old lawyer and developer, said he planned to seek the Democratic nomination for Governor in next May's primary. Charging Governor Wallace with a “record of indecision,” the. State Senator said, “Government has let things get out of control” in Alabama. Most public opinion polls show Mr. Wallace a heavy favorite for re‐election.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 15 (AP) — North Vietnamese and Government troops clashed five times yesterday and today in the remote Cambodian frontier province of Quang Due, the Saigon command announced. Two of the battles were said to have involved hand‐to‐hand fighting and the use of aircraft and armor.
CAI LAY, South Vietnam Nov. 4—The people who live in the villages and hamlets of this lush, wet, green Mekong Delta area say their lot has not changed much since the signing of the cease‐fire in Paris last January.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 16 (Reuters)—The battle for control of South Vietnam's border with Cambodia in the Central Highlands has intensified with the North Vietnamese Army counterattacking a Govenunent thrust to recapture border bases.
George Bush, the Republican National Chairman, says he won't be running for governor of Texas next year. Mr. Bush, who has been under pressure from some elements of the Texas G.O.P. to make the race, said, “I have made a final decision.” But he took pains to counter speculation that his decision was based in part on dim Republican prospects as a result of the Watergate scandal. “The Republicans can win that election in 1974,” he said. Mr. Bush admitted the prospect of being Governor carried enormous appeal. “But,” he said, “our political system is under fire, and I have an enormous sense of responsibility that compels me to remain in job.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 16 —Secretary of State Kissinger returned to Washington today and planned to give top priority to working out the final details for the stare of a Middie East peace conference that he hopes can be convened next month.
To the Editor: It has been seriously argued that for the sake of American foreign policy, specifically the military support of Israel, the suggested impeachment of Richard Nixon should be temporarily, if not permanently; suspended. The choice appears agonizing: the continued existence of Israel versus the continued existence of constitutional government in America. But is this a real dilemma?
WASHINGTON, Nov. 17 (UPI) —The number of veterans receiving college level benefits under the Vietnam G.I. bill has already exceeded the number trained in the 12‐year World War II program, the Veterans Administration reported today.
TINH HOA, South Vietnam, Nov. 17 —Tran Thip Phuong, who is 42 years old, has seven children and is pregnant, squatted in the dirt under the straw roof of a house by the side of Route 1, looking out at the rain.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 13—Once upon a time there was a Vietcong fairy And this fairy tale, made of animated characin living color, could have taught Walt Disney a thing or two about the skilluse of film.
BOOM BOOM ROOM, the New York Shakespeare Festival Lincoln Center production of a play by David Rabe, got eight favorable reviews (Gottfried, Women's Wear; Raidy, Newhouse Newspapers; Lewis, Bergen Record; Gaver, UPI; Harris, WCBSTV; Virgil Scudder, WINSRadio; Alvin Klein, WNYCRadio; Kroll, Newsweek), four mixed reviews (Wallach, Newsday; Stewart Klein, WNEW‐TV; Kalem, Time; Clurman, Nation) and 12 unfavorable reviews (Barnes, Times; Watt, News; Watts, Post; Glover, AP; Holder, WNBC‐TV; Sanders, WABC‐TV; Bookspan, WPIX‐TV; Woodruff, WMCA‐Radio; Novick, Village Voice; Simon, New York; Stasio, Cue; Hewes, Saturday Review/World). Clive Barnes: “The New York Shakespeare Festival's first play at the Vivian Beaumont Theater is the fourth play by David Rabe that Joseph Papp has produced, and it is also the first play by David Rabe that does not deal with Vietnam. The problem is to decide what it does deal with. It is possibly intended as a portrait of a young tramp as a neurotic. Its heroine is Chrissie, a gogo girl in Philadelphia, who dreams of—well, she seems to dream of very little really. The trouble with the play is that we are asked to spend three hours with Chrissie, and we really know no more about her at the end than we did at the beginning. It would have been quicker to send a telegram. Mr. Rabe was not helped at all by the production, which seemed to fasten on the weakest aspects of the play. The play is said to be directed by Mr. Papp, but, of course, as has been announced, Julie Bovasso was in charge until a few days ago. Still, as it is, Mr. Papp must take the rap. Let us hope that the Shakespeare Festival will have better luck next time.” For Walter Kerr, see Page 3.
The celebrants of Presidential power—Sorensen, Neustadt, Burns—have busily if rather quietly gone to work on their palinodes. Naturally, they try to save as much of the prior fabric as they can, amending here, canceling there and subtly restating throughout. Since they all agree that the last good Poiverful President was Mr. Kennedy, and that the main count against his successors is Vietnam, the obvious course is to claim that Presidential power remains a blessing—all but the war‐making power, which must be cut back.
PEKING, Nov. 18 (Reuters)—Premier Chou En‐tai, speaking at a dinner tonight in honor of a Vietcong leader, accused the South Vietnamese Government of violating the cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 19—The Supreme Court took the following actions today:
MEMPHIS, Nov. 19 — Things ought to be looking up for governors these days. In most states, the fiscal crunch of the sixties has been surmounted, in part because school‐age population has leveled off, and with it the cost of education. Nationally, attention has swung from the Cold War and Vietnam to domestic problems, so that once again governors are looked upon —and see themselves—as possible Presidents.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 5—President Nixon, dressed as a fiendish doctor, prepares a wicked ‐ looking hypodermic needle filled with a serum of dollars. Cambodia's President, Lon Nol, in diapers, lies on the floor clutching a baby bottle in the form of a bomb.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 19 (UPI)—South Vietnam said today that an American Quaker volunteer was aboard an Air Vietnam DC‐3 with 23 people aboard that has been imissing since Saturday on flight from Saigon to the northem city of Quang Ngai.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 19 (AP) —Vietnam veterans will probably receive an increase this year in educational benefits, but it will not be as much as expected, says the chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee.
A commendable tone of modesty and reserve is now apparent in President Nixon's reading of Vietnam. Gone are the invocations of “peace with honor,” of hints new American intervention if things don't go exactly as projected by the diplomats.
HONG KONG, Nov, 19 (UPI) —After nearly four weeks in North Vietnam and sections of South Vietnam that are controlled by the Vietcong, two American antiwar activists said here yesterday that full‐scale war would likely break out if a coalition Government was not formed in Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 20 (UPI)—The South Vietnamese Government raised gasoline prices about 32 cents a gallon today in an attempt to cut civilian energy consumption by 25 per cent within two months.
BEN TRE, South Vietnam, Nov. 20 —While large ‐ scale fighting is spreading in other parts of the country, Communist units appear to be stepping up a program of selective violence in the Mekong Delta.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 21 (AP) — Government and Commmunist troops fighting over the Mekong Delta's rice harvest clashed in a major battle today, leaving more than 100 dead and wounded, the military command said.
LAI KHE, South Vietnam, Nov. 21—A South Vietnamese division commander said today that the Saigon Government's forces would need American air support if the Communists staged a major offensive in the next few months.
PARIS, Nov. 21 (UPI)—The Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government has rejected South Vietnamese charges that it is preparing an offensive in violation of the Paris peace agreement.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21 (AP) — An cademic leader urged President Nixon today to use the occasion of Thanksgiving to grant amnesty to those who conscientiously refused to fight in the Vietnam war. The appeal came from Walter Adams, president of the American Association of University Professors, who is an economics professor at Michigan State University.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21—Now in the bleak November of President Nixon's unhappiest year the nation is being reminded of another November and another President—John F. Kennedy, dead these 10 years. Comparisons between the two men are inevitable, but to some in Washington—and not Mr. Nixon's friends alone — comparisons somehow seem unfair: Jack Kennedy made the Presidency look so easy. For President Nixon these days, it looks so hard. Once they were contemporaries and competitors. They served together in the House of Representatives. Each went on to the Senate. They ran for President against each other. Each in his turn was elected narrowly.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21 (UPI) —The Defense Department announced today that four servicemen previously listed as missing in Indochina have now been declared dead. There remain 1,201 men listed as missing. Among those declared dead is an Army major, John W. Lafayette, husband of Mrs. Catherine V. Lafayette of Red Bank, N. J.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 22 (UPI) — President Nguyen Van Thieu shook up South Vietnam's officer corps today in anticipation of a major Communist offensive late this year or early in 1974.
PARIS, Nov. 22, (UPI)—South Vietnam and the Vietcong resumed their eight‐month‐old negotiations here today but reported no progress in their search for an agreement on internationally supervised elections.
HONG KONG, Nov. 23 —president Nguyen Huu Tho, president of the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam, left for home today after a six ‐ day visit to China that apparently was a disappointment to him.
GIA NGHIA, South Vietnam, Nov. 9 — This quiet — perhaps too quiet for some people—provincial capital in the Annamite Mountains has the look of a Hollywood‐style frontier town in the American Southwest. The town consists of a few thousand yards of low white buildings set in a rectangle, open at one end, around a large dusty square.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Nov. 24 (AP)—Waves of South Vietnamese fighter‐bombers attacked a Communist air base at Katum, 70 miles northwest of Saigon near the Cambodian border, military sources said today.
Officers of the National Congress of Puerto Rican Veterans have charged that more than 60 per cent of the Vietnam veterans of Puerto Rican extraction in the metropolitan area are unemployed and that little is being done to ease their plight.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 24—The South Vietnamese Air Force has staged further large air strikes against Communist‐held areas northwest of Saigon, military sources reported today.
PORTLAND, Ore., Nov. 24 (AP)—President Nixon's pastor says he is under pressure to drop Mr. Nixon's church membership because of the President's handling of the Watergate scandal and the war in Southeast Asia.
MOSCOW, Nov. 24 — Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Communist party leader, will open new foreign‐policy offensive Monday with, a visit to India that will serve as a testing ground for Soviet strategy Asia in the post‐Vietnam era.
DENTON, Tex., Nov. 25 (UPI) —A former prisoner of war in Vietnam, Lieut. Col. Warren Robert Lilly, has announced he plans to marry another Air Force pilot's widow, Mrs. Jill Parker Snow. She is an airlines stewardess he met on “kind of a blind date” last April.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 26 (Reuters) — Military sources said today that Government aircraft flew 114 bombing sorties over two Communist airfields Friday — the heaviest raids since the ceasefire agreement last January.
VUNG TAU, South Vietnam, Nov. 20 — President Nguyen Van Thieu has nudged 15,000 South Vietnamese bureaucrats out of their offices into a “revolutionary” retraining program where white‐collar workers are learning to wear black pajamas, to box with their feet and, presumably, to cut red tape.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 27 (Reuters)—The Vietcong today boycotted a meeting with South Vietnamese military negotiators in protest against what they charged was the bombing of a Communistcontrolled town on Friday.
Al Bumbry, a 26‐year‐old Vietnam veteran who had a 337 batting average, hit seven home runs and drove in 34 runs for the Baltimore Orioles, yesterday was named the American League's rookie of the year. He received 13½ votes of 24 cast by the Baseball Writers' Association and became the oldest player to win the award since Gary Peters of the Chicago White Sox did it at the same age 10 years ago. Pedro Garcia of Milwaukee was the runnerup, trailing by 10½ votes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov 29—Knowledgeable South Vietnamese Air Force officials say they are convinced that the United States will soon begin replacing Government fighterbombers destroyed since the cease‐fire with faster, more maneuverable models of the supersonic planes.
LONDON—How one thinks about the situation in the Middle East—and particularly the Arab oil embargo—largely depends on one's point of vantage. The Arabs justify the embargo as a reasonable response to our hostile action in airlifting military supplies to their enemy during recent hostilities. They see it as a proper diplomatic instrument to induce us to press Israel to settle on their terms, and, though Americans often refer to the oil curtailment as blackmail, it is a far less drastic action than our carpet‐bombing of Hanoi last Christmas in an effort to improve our position in the Vietnamese negotiations.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 29 —The State Department has been examining whether President Nixon could legally order a resumption of United States bombing in Indochina should North Vietnam begin a major offensive in violation of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—A stone's throw from the United States Embassy, hidden by high walls, is a house built as a haven from the ubiquitous guardposts, sandbag protectives and rusting barbed wire of Saigon. In present ‐ day Vietnam, it's rather unique—it's a building designed for gracious living.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 27—They buried Pvt. Chau Tan Tai in the national military cemetery at Bien Hoa one recent morning, When the cease‐fire agreement was signed in Paris last January, he was a high school student, but then he failed an exam and was drafted.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 1—The Saigon command today reported a major battle in Tay Ninh Province, 35 miles northwest of the capital.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 1—The Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu, which has been talking of a Communist offensive next year, today put on trial the brigadier general charged with fleeing before last year's North Vietnamese drive in Quang Tri Province.
THANH DUC, South Vietnam, Oct. 2—The Government military spokesman announced yesterday in Saigon that a regiment of Communist troops, supported by a Vietcong battalion, had attacked two Government battalions just northeast of here.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 2 (AP) —The Senate Judiciary Committee approved a bill today to increase benefits payable to civilians held prisoner during the war in Southeast Asia to $150 a month. The benefits now total $60 a month.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 2—In the first six months after the signing of the Paris peace agreement, the United States provided the South Vietnamese Air Force with 142,000 bombs, rockets and flares and 13.8 million rounds of small‐arms ammunition, according to American military officials.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 2—The Senate approved a $1.2‐billion foreign assistance bill today by a vote of 54 to 42 after resisting two attempts to trim the authorization sharply.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 2—Brig. Gen. Vu Van Giai today was found guilty of abandoning his post as commander of the Third Division at Quang Tri during the Communists' 1972 offensive and was sentenced to five years' hard labor.
TRENTON, Oct. 3 (AP)—The New Jersey Department of Higher Education is conducting an experimental program that uses veterans of the war in Vietnam to help other ex‐servicemen to get into college.
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1973
ITHACA, N.Y.—The American conscience is not difficult to prick when democracy is in distress. It sent America into two world wars to save democracy. It sent her into a less decisive and less popular war in Vietnam to save democracy. It keeps hundreds of thousands of American soldiers posted around the world to stand guard for democracy. And it speaks up, eloquently and quite officially, whenever and wherever democracy is raped.
WASHINGTON—In the fall of 1939, in my native city in Vietnam, the now sadly famous former imperial capital of Hue, a young poet, Luu Trong Lu, published his Tieng Thu (The Sounds of Autumn). Overnight he became our idol.
Nobody speaks much about Vietnam now, but it happened, and we are heading into a postwar era — the third in the lifetime of millions of Americans. The style for modern postwar eras was set by the first one, following World War I, and it has, so far, proved to be a rather persistent style. Our postwar periods are eras of disillusion and rebirth, marked by economic laissezfaire, political corruption, social liberation, and cultural flowering. After World War I we had Harding's normalcy, Teapot Dome, the age of jazz and flappers, and the great “lost generation” of writers. After World War II and its Korean aftermath, we had a great era of uncontrolled business expansion, the Truman Administration scandals (pale ones, it now appears, but scandals nonetheless), the civilrights movement.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 4—Attorneys for First Lieut, William L. Calley Jr. asked the country's highest military review court today to overturn his conviction and 20‐year sentence for killing 22 civilians in the South Vietnamese hamlet of My Lai in 1968.
PARIS, Oct 4 (AP) — The political talks between the Saigon Government and the Vietcong were indefinitely suspended today after the Vietcong State Minister, Nguyen Van Hieu, walked out of the 28th session without waiting for the other side to speak.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5 (UP) —The Administration is reviewing its plans for withdrawing United States troops from overseas in light of continuing North Vietnamese military build‐ups and other factors, Defense Department officials said today. But they denied that some reductions had been canceled.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Oct. 5 (UPI)—A hand grenade rigged as a booby trap exploded in the midst of a crowd buying lottery tickets at a market place near Phnom Penh's airport today, killing at least 9 people and wounding 21, most of them women.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5 (AP) —The Army and Navy have tossed out the last of the remaining misconduct charge against former prisoners of war in Vietnam, the Pentagon said today.
PAULINE KAEL was remarking recently on “the Vietnamization of American movies.” “Today,” says Miss Kael, “movies have been saying that the system is corrupt, that the whole thing stinks, and they've been saying this steadily since the mid‐six‐ties.” But the American theater has been saying this for a much longer time: for the last 50 years, in fact. You can hear it almost as clearly in “The Hairy Ape” and “The Adding Machine” as in “Sticks and Bones” and “That Championship Season.”
The House and the Senate have reconciled their differing versions of war‐powers legislation, and the next move apparently will be President Nixon's veto. There is a good chance that the Senate will then override, but not much that the House will do the same. Even if Mr. Nixon prevails by a narrow margin in one house however, this is immensely important legislation, the first real step away from the imperial Presidency that gave us Vietnam and Watergate.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Oct. 6 (AP) — Government troops struggled today to keep the last exit road out of Sala Lek Pram free of insurgent forces. Field reports described the situation around the town, 35 miles north of Phnom Penh on Route 5, as “critical” The reports said that Government and rebel troops had met in see‐saw clashes on the highway south of the town.
SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 6—A Federal judge has denied. motions urging the release of a Vietnam veteran held in custody since June 25 for refusing to testify before a Federal grand jury here on alleged gun‐running to the Irish Republican Army.
WASHINGTON—The Department of Defense appears to have settled the question of how binding on prisoners of war it regards the Code of Conduct.
SAIGON South Vietnam, Oct. 7 (AP)—The Vietcong kidnapped an American civilian in the Mekong Delta, the United States Embass reported today. He was identified as Homer Elm, regional security officer for Page Communications.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 7—It is the meat and drink and even the after‐dinner liqueur. It labels a cocktall party success or failure. It is the blood of Washington journalism, the drop of oil in the machinery of Government. It is also the elbow in the stomach, the blade of combat.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 2—The boy with the fearful, helpless eyes no longer sits begging on the street. His baby sister no longer lies half naked on the grimy pavement.
WASHINGTON—The Vietnam‐era veterans have been afflicted with more plagues than Job. They participated in a war most Americans wanted to forget. They faced the debilitation of drug addiction and the humiliation of postwar unemployment. Now, still another millstone around the necks of veterans has been brought to my attention by letters sent to me by former servicemen.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8 (AP) —A bill to make the Youth Conservation Corps a permanent agency and expand its programs was passed try the Senate today by voice vote.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 8 (UPI)—An American contracting company appealed to the four‐nation truce team today to investigate the apparent kidnapping Saturday of an American security, adviser and two Vietnamese employes.
WHITESBURG, Ky.—In driving the mountain roads of eastern Kentucky, one is immediately struck by the similarity to the Central Highlands of Vietnam. The horizon is one of endless rows of emerald ridges, those farthest away hazed blue in the eternal mountain mist. Even the gaping abandoned strip‐mine benches are reminiscent of defoliated convoy routes, fire bases and landing zones.
NORFOLK, Va., Oct. 9 (AP) —Rear Adm. Jeremiah A. Denton Jr., who was held prisoner during the Vietnam, war for seven and a half years, has asked that he, be selected the next commandant of the Armed Forces Staff College here.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 9 —Among the actions taken today by the Supreme Court were the following:
LOS BANOS, the Philippines, Oct. 5—Such overused terms as “miracle rice” and “the green revolution” are voiced these days by the experts here at the International Rice Research Institute with the kind of irony that used to be reserved for the “light at the end of the tunnel” in Vietnam.
To the Editor: Despite the refusal of United States military spokesmen in Saigon to reveal the quantity of American‐supplied munitions the Thieu army is consuming [news story Oct. 3], there is no mystery whatsoever regarding its flagrant violations of the cease‐fire agreement or the American Government's total responsibility for paying for the protraction of the Vietnam war.
LOUISVILLE, Oct. 11 (AP)—Representatives of the Episcopal Church urged today that the “mere possession or personal use of marijuana be considered Imp more than a misdemeanor.”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 12 —Gerald Rudolph Ford of Michigan, the 60‐year‐old minority leader of the House of Reprosentatives, was nominated by President Nixon tonight to be the 40th Vice President of the United States.
BAN ME THUOT, South Vietnam, Oct. 7—In Ban Me Thuot—the overgrown “village of Thuot's Father”—land is a principal concern, for the montagnards of the Central Highlands are afraid they are losing theirs slowly, ineluctably, to the thrusting lowland Vietnamese. In the name of economis development, decrees enacted in Saigon have given outsiders, who somehow tend to be big businessmen, high‐ranking civil servants and officers like Air Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, rights to “virgin” land.
America in the sixties was a country torn apart. In the early years of the decade, the liberals newly in power were beginning to stick their hard noses into the Tar Baby of Vietnam; at the end, much of a generation, beginning in idealism, was profoundly disillusioned with American institutions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 13 (UPI) — Communist forces mounted a 14‐hour shelling and ground attack west of Hue and overran an 80‐man militia outpost southeast of the city, military reports said today.
PARIS, Oct. 13 (Reuters)—A Syrian Embassy spokesman said today that a Phantom jet bearing United States Air Force markings and piloted by an American who had fought in Vietnam was shot down yesterday over Damascus.
SAIGON — While the world's attention has shifted elsewhere, the war here sputters along at a deadly clip, blocking the political accommodation envisaged by the Paris peace agreements last January. And In the last few weeks, both sides have begun to crank up their rhetoric as well as their armed actions.
BEIRUT, Lebanon, Oct. 13—After eight days of fighting, Arab analysts continue to feel that there is going to be a prolonged war in which the Arab side enjoys economic, tactical and psychological advantages over Israel.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 13 (AP) —President Nixon will present Medals of Honor on Monday to nine men cited for conspicuous gallantry in Vietnam at the risk of their lives.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 14 —Authoritative sources have disclosed a second instance in which a “national security” wiretap authorized by President Nixon remained in effect on a former National Security Council staff member after he had left the Government and joined the Presidential campaign of Senator Edmund S. Muskie.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 14 (UPI)—Communist gunners shelled a South Vietnamese airborne position near Hue today for the fifth day, wounding five paratroopers, a Government spokesman said. Eight civilians were reported killed and five wounded in other incidents.
In a switch that could have important diplomatic repercussions, the Soviet Union reportedly has made overtures to exiled Cambodian Prince Norodom Sihanouk, whom the Kremlin has largely ignored since his deposition in a military coup three years ago. Although Moscow has maintained relations with the successor government of Lon Nol in Phnom Penh, a Tass dispatch the other day referred to Sihanouk as Cambodia's “head of state.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam Oct. 14 (Reuters)—A group of politicians, trade unionists and religious figures announced here today the formation of a committee to campaign for the return of Vietnam's former emperor, Bao Dai, to bring peace to the country.
MADISON, Wis., Oct. 15—What would normally be a, brief routine court hearing to assess a convicted defendant'st character before sentence is passed on him became today a full scale evocation of the Vietnam war—its morality, its impact on American youth and the climate of protest it engendered.
Representative Mario Biaggi promised yesterday that if elected Mayor he would give priority to Vietnam veterans on the 30,000 to 40,000 city jobs that he said were filled now by political clubhouse members.
Leaders of the state Conservative party—who cheered speech by Spiro T. Agnew at their annual dinner a year ago, watched the televised explanation of his no‐defense plea to tax evasion last night in silence.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 16 — The International Commission of Control and Supervision has been told that all its air services will be cut off Friday unless it pays over $500,000 in back bills. The commission does not have the money.
OSLO, Norway, Oct. 16—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc The have won the. Nobel Peace Prize for 1973. for negotiating the Vietnam cease‐fire agree. ment.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 16—Mrs. Ngo Ba Thanh, a dissident who was released from prison last month, staged a demonstration today to call attention to an attack that she said had been made on her last night.
Born 50 years ago in Furth, Germany. . . . Escaped Hitler's attack on Jews by fleeing to London in 1938 with his parents . . . moved to the United States to an apartment in the Fort George area of Upper Manhattan . . . enrolled in George Washington High School where he maintained an A average in night classes after working all day in a shaving brush factory . . . Began studies at City College to be an accountant but was drafted in 1943 . . . emerged as sergeant from Army counterintelligence corps. . . . Entered Harvard . . . received a bachelor's degree summa cum laude in 1950 . . . won four scholarships and two more Harvard degrees. . . . First book entitled “Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy,” an outgrowth of work with Council on Foreign Relations studying threat of Soviet action. . . . Began long association with Governor Rockefeller in 1957 as director of Rockefeller Brothers Fund's special studies project . . . was his adviser as he vied with Richard Nixon for the Republican nomination in 1968. . . . Met Mr. Nixon at a party at home of Clare Boothe Luce. . . . Mr Nixon said he knew Mr. Kissinger for it long time through his writings, especially 1957 book on nuclear weapons. . . . Rose quickly in stature as the President's foreign policy adviser. . . . Named Secretary of State in August. . . . Known as brisk and demanding teacher at Harvard from which he took a leave of absence to serve in Nixon Administration . . . graying and spectacled, stands 5 feet 9 inches tall and retains a trace of Germanic accent. . . divorced, has two children.
You will get a lot of arguments and even some sneers against a Nobel Peace Prize for Henry Kissinger, but in this corner it is an honor earned under very difficult circumstances.
OSLO, Norway, Oct. 16—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho have won the Nobel Peace Prize for 1973 for negotiating the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16—Secretary of State Kissinger said today that his Nobel Peace Prize award amounted to recognition of “the central purpose of President Nixon's foreign policy —achievement of a lasting peace.”
PARIS, Oct. 16—The Nobel Prize Committee, announcing its peace award to Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho to day, stressed the “moral responsibility” of all involved to see that the cease‐fire negotiated by the American and the North Vietnamese will lead to a “lasting peace for the warstricken peoples of Indochina.”
MOSCOW, Oct. 16 —Despite the outcry in influential circles in the United States that the new. Soyiet ‐ American relationship is rapidly becoming the major casualty of the Middle East war, Moscow is taking calm, stoical view.
MADISON, Wis., Oct. 16—G.I. euphemisms for instruments of destruction used in Vietnam filled a courtroom here today as a half‐dozen young former servicemen testified about incidents in which Vietnamese civilians were abused or killed by Americans.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 16 (UPI)—Vice President Tran Van Huang of South Vietnam has been hospitalized in serious condition, Government sources sai dtoday. Mr. Huang, who is 70 years old, was elected Vice President in 1972. He previously served as Premier twice.
Into the ranks of visionaries from Woodrow Wilson to Ralph Bunche, Albert Schweitzer and Dag Hammarskjold, Norway's Nobel Committee has chosen to admit two practicing diplomats of the present day whose mastery of the delicate arts of negotiation is unquestioned, but whose contributions to the cause of peace are much less clear.
OSLO, Norway, Oct. 17 (Reuters)—Criticism was strong in and outside Parliament here today over its Nobel Peace Prize committee's choice of Secretary of State Kissinger of the United States and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam as joint winners of the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize.
LONDON, Oct. 17—Maj. Gen. Gilbert H. Woodward, U.S.A., who represented the nation in delicate peace negotiations with Communists in North Korea and North Vietnam, died here today after having collapsed on flight from Washington to London. His age was 56.
STOCKHOLM, Oct. 18—Wassily Leontief, the Russian‐born Harvard economist, and Patrick White, the Australian novelist, won Nobel honors today. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 18—A group of Vietnam veterans who received less than honorable military discharges said today that the “bad” discharges were a result of their opposition to, the Vietnam war and racism! in the armed forces and had “stigmatized” them for life.
HACKENSACK, Oct. 18 — A 27‐year‐old law student and Vietnam war veteran won the right in Bergen County Court today to ring doorbells in the borough of Oradell to seek votes without registering with the Police Department.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 18 (AP)—The United States today advanced $5.6‐million to the International Commission of Control and Supervision to help the Vietnam peace‐monitoring agency out of a crippling deficit.
It's only 62 minutes long. It was photographed in black and white with a religious austerity. It has no theme music. It is a documentary, and its title sounds like something glimpsed on an index card at the Public Library.Yet Jerry Bruck Jr.'s "I. F. Stone's Weekly," which opened yesterday at the First Avenue Screening Room, is such a thorough delight it left me feeling the way other people said they felt after seeing "The Sound of Music." That is, quite high.I should admit that "The Sound of Music" depressed me. It evoked civilization's imminent collapse. It made me think of the Chinese Communists and suspect that they'd be taking us over sooner rather than later. What was the use of thought or reason? Our minds have already turned into mashed potatoes.Or have they?Not, I think, as long as Isadore Feinstein Stone is on the American scene, passionately exposing the fallacies, double-talk and ignorance of the various rascals in Government, elected, appointed or there simply because of being someone's friend.I. F. Stone, now 66, has been a maverick all his life, a Communist anarchist in his youth, once described as "a strident voice of illiberalism" by Spiro T. Agnew, and now self-defined as a counter-revolutionary.Through it all, he has been the ferocious conscience of American journalists and those American citizens who would listen to him in person or who subscribed to his newsletter, which he started in 1952 and finally folded in 1971, when he moved his often dumfounded prose to the New York Review of Books."I. F. Stone's Weekly" is no dopey paean to a great man. Supplemented by a modest, informative commentary spoken by Tom Wicker, the film presents Izzy Stone straight, with all his eccentricities and enthusiasms intact, in interviews, in public speeches and even walking down to the corner to stuff a week's issue into the post box.We listen to Izzy describe a hilarious early confrontation with the Atomic Energy Commission (about underground testing), requiring him to make a visit to some seismology experts in the Commerce Department's Coast and Geodetic Survey. "They were so glad to see a reporter. I don't think they'd seen a reporter since there was a tremble from Mount Ararat, when Noah's Ark landed."He describes the danger for Washington correspondents who become pals with statesmen ("You begin to understand there are certain things the public ought not to know"). He talks about his own lean years as a blacklisted reporter and the genesis of his weekly, through which he taught all the rest of us how to find stories within stories, through inconsistencies, through information inadvertently made public but unnoticed by other reporters.The film brilliantly succeeds in communicating Stone's near-obsessive interest in truth and his optimism. The war in Vietnam, he suggests, and the survival of the Vietnamese people through years of bombing have re-established "the primacy of man in an age of technology."Toward the end Stone tells a group of students: "I really have so much fun I ought to be arrested." There is more to that statement than sentimental fondness for his profession. A cub reporter, he says, may get so excited covering a big fire that he forgets that something really it burning.As Jerry Bruck Jr. is lucky to have a subject as dynamic as Stone, so is Stone lucky to have a young film maker as persistent and as obsessed, in his way, as Bruck. "I.F. Stone's Weekly" has been three years in the making, on a shoestring, and in bits and pieces. The result is a rare film, a fitting tribute to a man who never gives up.
LOS ANGELES, Oct. 18 (Reuters)—Jane Fonda filed a $2.8‐million damage suit against President Nixon and other top Government officials today, saying they had conspired to deprive her of her constitutional, rights.
STOCKHOLM, Oct. 19—The wags in Stockholm are saying that people ought to save their comic books because the next winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature might be Walt Disney.
MADISON, Wis., Oct. 19‐Former Senator Ernest Gruening of Alaska called all acts of resistance to the Vietnam war “fully justified in whatever form they take” in testimony here today at the presentencing hearing for Karleton Armstrong, who has pleaded guilty, to bombing a university research center.
The Making of a Vice President
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 20—The Vietcong's Provisional Revilutionary Government today released the full text of an order to its forces that appears to sanction stepped‐up military activity.
NORTHPORT, L. I. — A United States Government unit that opened here six years ago primarily to aid veterans of the war in Vietnam is now being besieged by World War II veterans.
The agony, of the Vietnam war, whatever else it has done to the United States, has certainly had one salutary effect. No previous period in the country's history has produced so extensive and so penetrating a scrutiny of American foreign policy and of the elements in the ‐ national thinking which have shaped it.
Henry Kissinger was chairing a White House meeting of the Washington Special Action Group on the Middle East crisis when he received the note last week. He smiled and passed the note. Then, applause.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Oct. 21 (UPI) —Cambodian Government troops and Communist forces battled today near Sala Lekpram where Route 5 the “rice toad” to Cambodia's second largest city of Battambang, has, been blocked for days, according to reports from the field. There was scattered fighting elsewhere.
MADISON, Wis., Oct. 22 —Several locally prominent radical activists, who attended the University of Wisconsin in the late nineteen‐sixties, testified in an occasionally tearful hearing here today on behalf of Karleton Armstrong, an admitted saboteur.
GLASSBORO, N. J., Oct. 23 (AP)—“In the aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate, the American people have begun to lose faith in their institutions and their leaders,” says Henry Ford 2d.
PARIS, Oct. 23—Le Duc Tho has rejected the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to him jointly with Secretary of State Kissinger for the Vietnam agreement they negotiated, Hanoi announced today.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 23 (Agence France‐Presse) —North Vietnam today attacked “maneuvers” by President Nixon and Secretary of State Kissinger, and criticized what it called the blindness of those who tended to forget that “American imperialism remains the No. 1 enemy of all the peoples.”
Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese negotiator, rejected the Nobel Peace Prize yesterday, charging that “peace has not yet really been established in South. Vietnam.” Details, Page 3.
Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese negotiator, rejected the Nobel Peace Prize yesterday, charging that “peace has not yet really been established in South Vietnam.” Details, Page 3.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 23 (AP) — Government planes and heavy artillery pounded positions from which North Vietnamese and Vietcong gunners were suspected of having lobbed shells into a division base camp at Lai Khe, 25 miles north of the capital, killing five civilians.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 23—The Supreme Court divided sharply again today over the issue of defining and prohibiting obscenity, with a narrow 5‐to‐4 majority continuing to make local community standards determine whether a crime has been committed.
MADISON, Wis., Oct. 24—Three leading opponents of the Vietnam war today defended Karleton Lewis Armstrong, who bombed the University of Wisconsin's Army Mathematics Research Center in 1970 as a protest against the war. A physics researcher was killed in the bombing.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24 —American intelligence officials report that North Vietnam has moved more than 70,000 fighting men, 400 tanks and more than 200 artillery pieces into South Vietnam since the ceasefire nine months ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 24—A South Vietnamese Government spokesman warned today that the rejection of the Nobel Peace Prize by Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese negotiator at the Paris talks, indicated that Hanoi was preparing a new offensive in the South.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24 —The Pentagon announced yesterday that it planned to add a burial place for an unidentified Vietnam war casualty at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Va.
EUGENE, Ore., Oct. 25—The Federal Bureau of Investigation agreed out of court today to apologize and pay $1,000 to a former. University of Oregon student president “whose F.B.I. file was given to a radio station news director.
To the Editor: Bertrand Russell said shortly before his death: “No people anywhere in the world would, accept being expelled en masse from their home country; how can anyone require the people of Palestine to accept a punishment which nobody else would tolerate?”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 25 (AP)—A South Vietnamese Government base in the Central Highlands 12 miles west of Pleiku fell to the North Vietnamese two days ago, military sources said today. It was the second large Government camp near Pleiku captured in a month.
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's news conference in Washington last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
To the Editor: After more than twenty years of protecting and building up Taiwan, the United States is now withdrawing from that island. This is a follow‐up of the Nixon‐Chou joint communiqué issued in February 1972, in which the President affirmed the “ultimate objective of the withdrawal of all U.S. forces and military installations from Taiwan” and said the U.S. “will progressively reduce its forces and military installations on Taiwan as the tension in the area diminishes.” Now that a cease‐fire has been reached in Vietnam, the U.S. is fulfilling its commitments.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 26 (AP)—The South Vietnamese Government reported more fighting in the Central Highlands today.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26—President Nixon smiled a lot at his news conference tonight, but they were not happy smiles.
WASHINGTON — Dramatic events, to be fully realized, need characters in dramatic crisis, but normally this city fails to produce more than an occasional actor who can play the role. In the last ten days it has had them in abundance.
Tho Says No The 1973 Nobel Peace Prize situation, controversial from the start, was thrown into further confusion last week when Le Due Tho of North Vietnam rejected his share of the award won jointly with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger for their negotiation of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement. Mr. Tho said, “Peace has not yet really been established.” His action reflected Hanoi's view that the United States is responsible for the continued fighting in South Vietnam. Two of the five members of the prize selection committee have resigned in protest against the joint award, and it was not immediately clear whether the committee now would leave Mr. Kissinger as the sole recipient. Meanwhile, the Physics. Prize was awarded to Ivar Giaever and Leo Esaki, both working for American companies, and Brian D. Josephson of Britain; and the Chemistry Prize went to Ernest Otto Fischer of Germany and Geoffrey Wilkinson of Britain.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 27—The Vietcong charged today that the United States had violated the Paris peace agreement by leaving nearly 20,000 military personnel in civilian guise to oversee combat operations by South Vietnamese forces.
A letter denouncing the selection of Secretary of State Kissinger for the Nobel Peace Prize has been sent to the Norwegian Parliament by a group of 60 professors and graduate students at Harvard and the Massachussets Institute of Technology.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 28—In answering the first question at his press conference Friday, President Nixon brought up the case of Aaron Burr as a precedent to support his continued withholding of Presidential papers. He said:
HOAI MY, South Vietnam, Oct. 20—A deceptive serenity cloaks this humble village near the central coast of South Vietnam. The Lai Giang River, broad and clear, moves lazily through the lush rice paddies to the sea. On its southern bank, mingling among banana trees and coconut palms, thatched houses stand interwined by meandering paths.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 29 (UPI)—Communist troops inflicted heavy losses on a Government militia platoon in a night attack 64 miles northeast of Saigon and Government troops killed more than 80 Communists in a battle in the Mekong delta, the Saigon command reported today.
GERMANTOWN, Ohio, Oct. 29 (AP) — About a dozen national peace groups have agreed to discard protest marches in favor of lobbying in Congress for an end to United States aid to South Vietnam and Carnbodia.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 29 (AP) —Patrick J. Buchanan, speechwriter for President Nixon, said today that the broadcast networks have too much power in United States news reporting.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 29 — The new Government, installed 15 days ago as a result of a student uprising, intends to accelerate efforts to improve relations with China and North Vietnam sources close to it said today.
DENVER, Oct. 30 (AP)—The United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit has over turned the trespassing conviction of five antiwar activists, ruling that military officers could not bar civilians from public areas of the Air Force Academy.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 30 (AP) —The United States today accused North Vietnam of shipping vast quantities of matériel and of sending large numbers of troops into South Vietnam in violation of the Jan 28 Paris peace agreements.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 30 (Reuters) — Government troops have reported killing 37 Vietcong soldiers in two clashes in the Mekong delta, where both sides are involved in a battle for the area's rice harvest.
TOKYO, April 30 (AP) Dr. Benjamin Spock and his wife left Hanoi today after a visit to North Vietnam, the Vietnam press agency reported.
PARIS, April 30—American and North Vietnamese delegates today concluded three sessions of talks to “prepare a review” of the Indochina ceasefire.
ST. LOUIS, April 30—“The war has come home,” said Joe Garcia of Seattle, a member of the steering committee of the National Planning Conference on Emotional Needs of Vietnam Veterans. The group met here last weekend under the sponsorship of th National Council of Churches.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 30 (AP)—Two correspondents for Newsweek and French woman, arrested when they returned from a stay of 11 days in Vietcong territory, were brought back to Saigon and released from Government custody tonight.
BANGKOK, Thailand, April 30 (AP)—A former Foreign Minister has condemned the continued presence of American forces in Thailand, saying it was never intended that they should remain after a Vietnam cease‐fire.
A lot of Americans thought George McGovern hysterical last year when he said the Nixon Administration was “the most corrupt in American his– tory.” But neither Senator McGovern nor anyone who supported hint should take pleasure in the considerable vindication they are now receiving. This grim spectacle of investigitkin, recrimination and resignation, overshadowed as it is by the probability of criminal indictment, shakes not just “the Nixon Administration” but American government, and to its rots.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 1 (Reuters)—The Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government released 322 South Vietnamese civilians yesterday, Saigon high command sources reported today.
WASHINGTON, April 30 Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that the continued American bombing in Cambodia was legally justified by the Constitution and was “a meaningful interim action” to force the Communist‐backed insurgents there to agree to cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, May 1—President Nixon today asked Congress to authorize $2.9‐billion in foreign economic and military aid in the fiscal year beginning July 1, including $632‐million for rebuilding all countries of Indochina except North Vietnam.
PARIS, May 1—North Vietnamese and United States negotiators returned home today with the American threatening resumption of United States military action in Vietnam if violations of the cease‐fire continued and Hanoi's representative ruling out a meeting soon between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho.
To the Editor: Having just returnee from conferences with United Nations and national European leaders in Geneva, Vienna and London, I've seen Watergate dominate the front pages of the European press as well as all discussions, official and unofficial.
WASHINGTON, May 1—President Nixon today asked Congress to authorize $2.9‐billion in foreign economic and military aid in the fiscal year beginning July 1, including $632‐million for rebuilding all countries of Indochina except North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 1 (UPI) — Duong Van Minh, the retired general who overthrew Ngo Dinh Diem in 1963, made an apparent bid for leadership of a third force political movement today by offering his own program for South Vietnam's political future.
MOSCOW, May 1—Leonid Ibrezhnev, the Soviet party leader, today reaffirmed the Kremlin's desire for further improvement in Soviet‐American relations.
WASHINGTON, May 1 —Charles W. Colson, former special counsel to President Nixon, has confirmed that four months before the Watergate burglary he discovered that one of the conspirators, E. Howard Hunt Jr., a friend he had recommended for a White House job, had written a fake cable implicating President Kennedy in the assassination of South Vietnam's President Diem.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 1 (AP)—President Nguyen Van Thieu plans a “reform of the national structure” in an effort to streamline and decentralize the South Vietnamese Government, a Government spokesman said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 2 (AP)—Tlhe Saigon Government canceled scheduled release of Vietcong civilian prisoners at Loc Ninh today.
Aerial photographs of the results, of the heavy United States bombing of Hanoi last December show damage to military targets, to a hospital near a military airfield and to a commercial and residential area close to the main railroad station and yards.
WASHINGTON, May 1 (UPI) —Robert C. Odle Jr., director of administration for President Nixon's re‐election committee, has testified that he spent $3,000 to $4,000 in campaign cash to help organize demonstrations in support of Mr. Nixon's order in 1972 for the mining of Haiphong harbor.
To the Editor: In his April 3 letter to The Times, A. Jarrell Raper deplored what he saw as a slowing down, a drawing back from the nation's commitment to racial integration. Citing a national leadership that appeared unwilling to sustain and continue the momentum toward a total amalgam of the races, Mr. Raper lamented the consequences which would follow an abandonment of this social experiment.
WASHINGTON, May 2‐Henry A. Kissinger insisted today that “there is an agreement” for him to meet with Le Duc Tho, Hanoi's chief negotiator, in Paris later this month, but that the two sides had not yet agreed on when to announce it.
HONG KONG, May 2 (Reuters)—North Vietnam's Defense Minister, Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, has called for the urgent buildup and modernization of Hanoi's armed forces, the North Vietnam press agency reported today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 2 (AP)—Two helicopters carryIng four members of the truce commission were fired on today as they flew over Vietcongcontrolled territory in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 2 (AP)—The Sciuth Vietnamese and Japanese Governments began investigations today into the possibility that United States defoliants used in the Vietnam war are still contaminating marine life in Vietnamese waters.
To the Editor: In his April 23 address to The Associated Press, Henry Kissinger declared that in seeking to find the solution for the management of their diversity the Atlantic nations must work out a blueprint that will redefine the common objectives which underline their unity. Such a blueprint, a new “Atlantic Charter,” will build upon the record of the past, will deal with the problems that success has created and will establish for the Atlantic nations a new relationship in the development of which that new “major power center,” Japan, can share.
LOS ANGELES, May 3 (UPI) —The Los Angeles City Council refused today to consider a resolution censuring Jane Fonda for statements she made concerning prisoners of war. After the council adjourned, the actress reiterated charges at a news conference that P.O.W.'s were manipulated by the Pentagon into giving a distorted account of North Vietnamese prison camps and that those prisoners who contended there was systematic torture were not telling the truth.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 3 (AP)—The United States Ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, made a public speech today for the first time in 15 months and said that although fighting continued in South Vietnam, “the number of large battles has fallen off sharply, and casualty figures continue to inch downward.”
WASHINGTON, May 3 (AP) —The Pentagon changed today the listing of six Southeast Asia war casualties from missing or captured to dead by hostile action. None were from the New York area. The action reduced the number of American servicemen still unaccounted for to 1,341.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 3 (Reuters)—The Vietcong said today that they had opened fire on a United States reconnaissance aircraft misusing a flight corridor for the Vietnam truce commission just below the demilitarized zone.
PARIS, May 3 (Reuters)—Representatives of the South Vietnamese Government and the Vietcong failed today to break the deadlock in their negotiations for settlement of South Vietnam's political future.
In Winthrop, Mass., last January, fifteen armed men burst into the home of Mr. and Mrs. William Pine, terrorized them and their daughter for what the family said was fifteen minutes, then abruptly left. They were state, police plainclothesmen, raiding the wrong house in search of a drug operation.
WASHINGTON, May 3 Henry A. Kissinger said today that the situation in Cambodia had improved both militarily and politically in recent weeks and that there was a possibility that negotiations might begin in the near future to end the fighting there.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass.—Not far from Quang Ngai City the Muc Tien refugee camp lies on a sandspit on a river. Some 20,000 people live in the eongenies of tents and tin‐roofed shacks, each tent sheltering ten or more families, and each family with only the space for a bed and a bundle of belongings.
WASHINGTON May 3—The General Accounting Office today referred to the Justice Department for “further investigation and action” the placing in The New York Times, of an advertisement that was secretly paid for by President Nixon's re‐election committee, in apparent violation of Federal law.
SAN ANTONIO, Tex., May 5 (AP)—Army Maj. Arnold Levine, a quartermaster officer here at Fort Sam Houston, was charged early today with, beating to death his Vietnamese wife and four‐year‐old son.
Representative Carl Albert, Speaker of the House and a long‐time supporter of the Administration's war policy in Vietnam, has joined the widening band of legislators ready to challenge the President's continuation of the war in Cambodia. A fight on the floor of the House Representatives looms next week over the requested appropriation of funds to pay for the current military actions that threaten to re‐engage this country in the civil wars across Indochina.
MOSCOW, May 4—Henry A. Kissinger arrived here today for talks with the Soviet leadership on the timing and agenda for the expected visit to Washington this summer of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Communist party leader.
WASHINGTON, May 4 —Before taking off on another delicate trouble‐shooting mission to Vietnam early in January, Gen. Alexander Meigs Haig Jr. posed for pictures with President Nixon outside the Nixon home in Key Biscayne, Fla. As the men turned back toward the House, the President suddenly reached over and fingered the four bright stars on the general's shoulder. The gesture perhaps best symbolized the affection and the pride that the President has for the 47‐year‐old career military officer whom he chose today as his White House chief of staff.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 4 (AP) — President Nguyen Van Thieu's top adviser.‐accused the Vietcong today of stalling at the Paris political talks because, he said, they know they cannot win a national election.
PARIS—The Watergate scandal isn't even remotely concerned with United States foreign policy. Nevettheless, should the affair result in perceptible weakening of President Nixon's position, misinterpretation of his powers, or misjudgment of hid intentions, overseas crises could suddenly develop.
HUE, South Vietnam, May —High‐ranking American and South Vietnamese officials say that North Vietnamese troops are preparing for an eventual offensive in the two northernmost provinces of South Vietnam.
This is a Pentagon story, and you will probably not believe it. The truest Pentagon stories are never believed until it is too late. Remember the C‐5A? Remember the TFX? Remember the electronic wall around Vietnam? Remember Vietnam?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 5—The South Vietnamese Government plans to release Tran Ngoc Chau, a former official and valued friend of many American advisers in Vietnam, to the Communists in the next few days, according to a Government spokesman.
“Right Now”: Frank V. Votto and Mamie Ballard of the state's Division of Veteran Affairs discuss programs for returning Vietnam servicemen, Channel 9, 9:30 A.M.
Secretary of Labor Peter J. Brennan and two mayoral candidates helped the New York County Council of the Veterans of Foreign Wars accent patriotism yesterday in a parade marking the 26th anniversary of Loyalty Day and dedicated to “our prisoners of war and returning veterans.”
WASHINGTON—The Nixon Administration seemed uncertain last week about its intentions in Indochina.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 4 —The Government troops defending Hue have adopted guerrilla tactics as they continue fighting the war without their American partners.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 6 (Reuters)—South Vietnam held its first elections today since the cease‐fire but Vietcong candidates were not allowed to participate.
WASHINGTON—Back when we had a half million troops in Vietnam, an irate citizen wrote a letter to the White House addressed not to the President but to his speechwriters. Why did the President keep warning about “precipitous withdrawals,” the writer wanted to know, when the correct adjective was “precipitate”?
AUSTIN, Tex., May 6—A former United States Marine lieutenant who once called for an end to the Vietnam war at a rally attended by President Nixon was elected to the Council in this university city yesterday.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 4—Several thousand North Vietnamese laborers have been sent into the northwestern part of South Vietnam to build roads and airfields and to move supplies, according to senior American and South Vietnamese officials.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 4—Several thousand North Vietnamese laborers have been sent into the northwestern part of South Vietnam to build roads and airfields and to move supplies, according to senior American and South Vietnamese officials.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 6 (AP)—A helicopter of the International Commission of Control and Supervision was fired, on today over a “contested” area in the Mekong Delta, commission sources reported.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 7 (UPI)—The first river convoy to reach Phnom Penh in two weeks arrived today after losing a tanker to Communist fire.
LOS ANGELES, May 7—Charles W. Colson, President Nixon's former counsel, ordered the forgery of State Department cables to implicate President Kennedy in the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam, according to documents released today at the Pentagon papers trial.
WASHINGTON, May 7 (UPI) —The House passed, by a vote of 340 to 1, and sent to the Senate today a bill that would authorize burial of a victim of the Vietnam war in the tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery. Representative Charles E. Wiggins, Republican of California, cast the dissenting vote.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 7 (UPI)—North Vietnam plans to invite relatives of some of the Americans who died in prison camps or plane crashes there to visit the servicemen's graves, a spokesman from Hanoi said today.
A newspaperman for 20 years, he toured the Bay of pigs battlefield with Fidel Castro in 1961, covered the Dominican Republic Revolution in 1965, toured the Soviet Union in 1967, spent two weeks in North Vietnam in 1970 and covered the Nixon trip to China in 1972.… He and another reporter, Clark Hoyt, submitted memo to Senator McGovern's’ staff that broke the story of Senator Thomas Eagleton's history of psychiatric therapy.
LOS ANGELES, 7—Following are excerpts from a transcript of additional grand jury testimony by E. Howard Hunt Jr. and from an affidavit by Egil Krogh Jr. as released at the Pentagon papers trial here today:
SAIGON, South Vietnam — A Canadian secretary misses mountains and snow. A Hungarian misses goulash. And the female Polish interpreter misses her husband.
VIENTIANE, Laos, May 7 (UPI)—A spokesman for the Communist Pathet Lao said today that the organization has disengaged itself from an alliance with North Vietnam, the Vietcong and Cambodian Communists because Laos and other nations of Indochina must now solve their own problems “independently and separately.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 7 (Reuters)—A South Vietnamese military spokesman said that 196 civilian prisoners were released at Quang Tri city below the demilitarized zone today.
American and South Vietnamese officials are making detailed charges of a substantial North Vietnamese military build‐up in the northern provinces of South Vietnam. The most important developments alleged seem to be the construction of a major logistics base at Khe Sanh and a new road from there through the Ashau Valley to the vicinity of Da Nang.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 7 (Agence France‐Presse) — The North Vietnamese leadership today marked the 19th anniversary of Dien Bien Phu with exhortations for hard work, increased productivity and unending “dynamic” struggle for national liberation, the building of socialism, and reconstruction.
The 1973 Pulitzer Prize for public service in journalism was awarded yesterday to The Washington Post for its investigation of the Watergate case, the affair that began with an attempt to bug Democratic National Headquarters last June and grew into a national scandal last month.
LOS ANGELES, May 7 —Charles W. Colson, President Nixon's former counsel, ordered the forgery of State Department cables to implicate President Kennedy in the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam, according to documents released today at the Pentagon Papers trial.
The annual convention of the Episcopal Diocese of New York yesterday urged “pardon and/or clemency to persons currently incarcerated for mere possession and use of marijuana,” and amnesty for all who refused service in Vietnam for reasons of conscience.
SYDNEY, Australia, May 8—Australia is lifting her embargo on trade with Communist nations, including North Vietnam —four months after withdrawal of the last Australian soldiers from the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, May 8—Four former Army sergeants who organized a ring that systematically defrauded noncommissioned officers clubs in Vietnam told Senate investigators today that the Army was incapable of uncovering such wrongdoing by itself.
WASHINGTON, May 8—On Sept. 16, 1971, President Nixon was asked at a news conference what the United States could do about the one‐man presidential campaign then in progress in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 8 (UPI)—The Vietcong charged today that Saigon troops fighting in a Communist‐held area had sprayed toxic chemicals that “ruined” more than 1,500 acres of land and caused serious illness to “large numbers of persons.”
WASHINGTON, May 8 — The State Department acknowledged today that E. Howard Hunt Jr., a Watergate conspirator, was given access to secret Vietnam diplomatic cables in 1971 at the request of David R. Young Jr., then a White House aide.
In an unrelated case yesterday, Nguyen Tan Doi, another member of the National Assembly and the head of South Vietnam's largest bank, was sent to prison despite his immunity because of charges that he had embezzled millions of dollars in investors’ funds. He was taken to Chi Hoa Prison, where Mr. Chau has been kept.
WASHINGTON, May 9 (UPI) —The Defense Department announced today that six servicemen previously listed as missing in Indochina had been declared dead as a result of hostile action. There remain 1,329 men listed as missing. Among the six is Maj. George M. Jourdenais, of the Air Force, whose widow lives at Plattsburgh Air Force Base in upstate New York.
WASHINGTON, May 9—A Nixon Administration official told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today that despite the Vietnam and Laos cease‐fires, 15,000 to 20,000 Thai “Nregular” troops — financed by the United States—were now based in Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9 (UPI)—North Vietnam today broadcast its first posttruce charge that Americans had tourtured Communist prisoners, alleging atrocities that ranged from “brutal beatings” to “surgical experiments.”
PARIS, May 9 (AP)—The Vietcong proposed today three‐point plan for a new cease‐fire to put an end to the fighting throughout South Vietnam. It was immediately rejected by Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9—President Nguyen Van Thieu is giving “favorable” consideration to a petition from Tran Ngoc Chau, a former member of the National Assembly and respected friend of many American officials, requesting that the not be released to the Communists, along with other civilian prisoners, a Government spokesman said today.
GRAFENWOHR, West Germany, May 3—As the United States Army in Europe tries to rebuild itself after years of neglect during the Vietnam war, its biggest problem is still morale. To the long‐standing irritaas of drug abuse and racial tension a new problem has been added—devalued dollars that do not go far in the inflated West German economy.
GRAFENWOHR, West Germany, May 3—As the United States Army in Europe tries to rebuild itself after years of neglect during the Vietnam war, its biggest problem is still morale. To the long‐standing irritants of drug abuse and racial tension a new problem has been added—devalued dollars that do not go far in the inflated West German economy.
WASHINGTON, May 9 (UPI)—The Army said today it would investigate charges that Gen. William C. Westmoreland and other high Army officers had sought to cover up frauds committed in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 9—The head of the Central Intelligence Agency said today that the agency had been “insufficiently cautious” in providing materials to a White House aide involved in the burglary of the office of Dr. Daniel Ellsberg's former psychiatrist.
WASHINGTON, May 9 — A Nixon Administration official told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today that despite the Vietnam and Laos cease‐fires, 15,000 to 20,000 Thai “irregular” troops — financed by the United States—were now based in Laos.
DALLAS, May 10 (UPI)—The group sponsoring a national homecoming celebration for all Vietnam veterans sent out its invitations yesterday. The guest list was impressive for the numbers alone.
WASHINGTON, May 10—For more than 10 months, investigators and reporters have been searching for a connection between Charles W. Colson and the Watergate affair through his friendship with E. Howard Hunt Jr., one of the Watergate conspirators, who pleaded guilty.
WASHINGTON, May 10 William H. Sullivan, a senior American negotiator with North Vietnam, said today that while Hanoi officials strongly desired foreign economic aid, they were suspicious of any multinational programs because “they don't trust the Russians or Chinese any more than they do us.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 10 (UPI)—The Vietcong leadership said today that it was willing to release civilian prisoners without supervision of the international truce team but Saigon said it would not proceed with the releases unless the observers were present.
WASHINGTON, May 10 —The House of Representatives, in a rebuke to President Nixon's Indochina policies, voted 219 to 188 today to block the transfer of defense funds to finance the continued bombing of Cambodia.
Howie Kaufman, the hero of Philip Dossick's good but poorly titled “The P.O.W.” is a young New York veteran of the Vietnam war, permanantly disabled by a wound that has left him paralyzed from the waist down. The film picks him up shortly after his discharge from the hospital, and it leaves him, a few weeks later, at the end of a party given in his honor by several of his friends. Nothing too dramatic happens in between. Howie renews acquaintance with a girl he used to know, attempts two — unsuccessful — job interviews, sets up housekeeping in his own one‐room apartment; and without too much hope and without despair he begins to settle into a life of limited and difficult options.
To the Editor:
The House has taken a historic step toward restoring Congressional authority over war‐making and toward ending once and for all the United States military involvement in Indochina with its vote yesterday denying President Nixon the authority to transfer defense funds to pay for the bombing of Cambodia and for other Indochina activities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 11—Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker, who has presided for six contentious years as the paramount American’ authority in South Vietnam and has become the last major symbol of United States involvement here, left Saigon today.
LOS ANGELES, May 11—In an era of courtroom spectaculars, the Pentagon papers trial became one of the most spectacular of all.
WASHINGTON, May 11 —The White House said today that the United States would continue with “the right policy” of bombing in Cambodia in support of President Lon Nol's government, despite the vote yesterday in the House of Representatives blocking the transfer of military funds for such raids.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, May 12 (UPI) — The Vietcong charged today that United States warplanes had been bombing in South Vietnam since April in violation of the cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, May 11 (AP) —With antiwar bombing tapering off, the General Services Administration is drafting plans to reduce security in many Federal buildings across the country.
The dismissal of all charges of espionage, theft and conspiracy in the Ellsberg case is an indictment of the Government's resort to police‐state tactics in its effort to discredit and intimidate critics of its Vietnam policy.
PARIS, May 11—Brig. Gen. Lon Non, brother of the Cambodian President, Marshal Lon Nol, has called for the United States to “use stronger measures, renew bombing of North Vietnam more intensively if necessary,” to force the North Vietnamese to withdraw from Cambodia.
BANGKOK, Thailand, May 11 (Reuters) — The Thai Government today charged a police officer with the premeditated murder of 81 people killed when a Cathay Pacific airliner crashed in South Vietnam last year.
WASHINGTON, May 11 (AP) —President Nixon today officially designated this Sunday as Mothers Day. He said in statement that this year particularly “we honor the mothers and wives of those who served in Vietnam.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 11 (AP)—The bodies of 20 Americans who died in captivity have been removed from Hanoi's municipal cemetery, to a location about 35 miles away, in accordance with local tradition, a United States military group visiting Hanoi was told today.
NEW HAVEN, May 11 —More than 1,000 faculty members and students at Yale University are petitioning the school's trustees, who meet to morrow, to supersede normall operating procedures and vote to award an honorary degree to a Vietnamese international lawyer who is in jail in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, May 12—Dr. William C. Rasmussen, a prominent American geologist and hydrologist woiking under contract in Vietnam for the Agency for International Development, was killed yesterday when his jeep triggered a land mine on a highway 85 miles east of Saigon, the United States Embassy announced today.
WASHINGTON, May 12—Graham A. Martin, Presider Nixon's nominee to be Ambas sador to South Vietnam, unsuccessfully urged the Central Intelligence Agency in 1970 to restore its secret financing to Italy's leading political party the Christian Democrats, high!y reliable intelligence sources re port. Mr. Martin was Ambas sador to Italy at the time.
WASHINGTON—The Chinese once believed that their emperors were chosen by God, and were therefore invulnerable to mortal challenge—unless they so violated the laws of God that the mandate of heaven, as they called it, was withdrawn. In that case they would lose the ability to rule and thus surely be overthrown.
NEW HAVEN, May 12—The trustees of Yale University, citing “a division of opinion,” decided today not to award an honorary degree this year to Ngo Ba Thanh, jailed Vietnamese lawyer, despite a petition campaign by more than 1,000 faculty members and students to grant her the award. The petitioners had appealed to the trustees to honor Mrs.
CANBERRA, Australia, May 12 (Reuters) — The Australian Government has relaxed controls on strategic Worts covering commercial trade with North Vietnam, North Korea, Cuba, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam has announcd.
VIENTIANE, Laos, May 12—The Communist‐led Pathet Lao today denied the existence of any formal Indochina Communist front, implying that it was free to negotiate a permanent political settlement in Laos independent of a settlement covering Vietnam and Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, May 12—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Communist party leader, will visit the United States from June 18 to 26 for talks with President Nixon, the White House announced today.
THE falsification of history is one of man's most popular sports, ranging from Stalin's elimination of Trotsky to portrayals of our war in Vietnam as a peace‐making mission. A new chapter was added to this time‐honored practice with the recent televising on WCBS's “Camera Three” of a two‐part program about Leni Riefenstahl—an unfortunate whitewash of a great and dangerous film artist responsible for one of the most notorious masterpieces of world cinema, “Triumph of the Will.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 12 (AP)—The Vietcong charged today that American warplanes had resumed bombing in South Vietnam in violation of the cease‐fire.
SAIGON—When Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker boarded his special Air Force plane Friday to leave Vietnam after six years as America's presiding authority here, his secretaries and even his security guards had tears in their eyes.
ROME, May 12—Pope Pau VI today granted an audienc to a two‐man Vietcong dele gation, his first recorded meet ing with representatives o South Vietnamese Communists
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 13 (AP)—The Vietcong charged today, for the second time, that American planes had bombed in South Vietnam, saying that 34 persons had been wounded in the latest action.
WASHINGTON, May 13 —John W. Dean 3d, the former White House counsel, actively attempted to set up an undercover espionage and intelligence ring to infiltrate antiwar protest groups before the Democratic and Republican National Conventions last year, Government sources said today.
When Henry A. Kissinger flies back to Paris this Thursday to try to patch up the crumbling Paris peace accords with Hanoi's Le Duc Tho, he won't be alone with his Administration aides and Presidential instructions. Congress will be there too.
WASHINGTON, May 14—The Secretary of the Army, Robert F. Froehlke, turned down today parole board recommendations that he trim three years from the 20‐year sentence of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr.
PARIS, May 14—North Viet nam today reiterated its charge that United States planes had struck Communist‐held areas South Vietnam and warned that forthcoming talks with Henry A. Kissinger would be can celed if raids continued.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 14 (AP) — The fournation peacekeeping commission voted unanimously today to investigate Communist charges that the United States had resumed bombing in South Vietnam in violation of the cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, May 14—The Nixon Administration, rebuffed on its Indochina policies by the House last week, was rebuffed further today in the Senate by two moves aimed at cutting off funds for bombing in Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 14 (Reuters) — The Vietcong have replaced one of their top fighthig generals as head of their delegation to the Vietnam cease‐fire military negotiations in Saigon and assigned him back to duty with military units in the field.
WASHINGTON, May 15—In his previous negotiations with the North Vietnamese, Henry Kissinger was negotiating from strength, but now, with all U. S. troops and prisoners withdrawn from Vietnam, he is negotiating from weakness.
WASHINGTON, May 15 (UPI) —A special government and industry program to find jobs or training for nearly 1.4 million Vietnam War era veterans in the 1973 fiscal year will surpass its target, Labor Secretary Peter J. Brennan said yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 15—When there were 500,000 American troops in Vietnam, a few of them used to visit the sprawling Go Vap orphanage here every Sunday, to play with the children and bring them a little money and canned meat. It was the orphans’ one good meal of the week.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 15 (AP)—A group of 121 Vietnamese maidents of Cambodia flew home‐to ‘Saigon today, free after having spent six months to five years in Phnom Penh jails as political prisoners.
Jan. 27: The accord to end the Vietnam war goes into effect, and the United States withdraws its troops. At home, most American citizens heave a sigh of relief—but there are some who don't.
Howard H. Callaway was sworn in as Secretary of the Army, replacing Robert F. Froehlke, who resigned to return to his insurance business. The 46‐year‐old Mr. Callaway is a former United States Representative from Georgia, a veteran of the Korean conflict and a West Point graduate. Among the matters Mr. Calloway may have to deal with is the case of Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., convicted of mass killings at the South Vietnamese hamlet of Mylal. A request for reduction to 17 years of Calley's 20‐year sentence was rejected by Mr. Froehlke on his last day in office. Calley's lawyer said he would now repeat the appeal to Mr. Cal
CHICAGO (AP)—John Craddick, a 24‐year‐old Vietnam war veteran, has a job as a bus driver.
PARIS, May 16—Henry A. Kissinger arrived here tonight for a new series of talks with Le Duc Tho to “strengthen the peace in Indochina” and to improve the enforcement of. the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement that they completed here last January.
WASHINGTON, May 16—President Nixon accused Congress today of “action that could severely undermine” the chances of restoring peace to Cambodia and all of Indochina.
ROME, May 16—The proCommunist newspaper Paese Sera reported today that the Italian state‐owned oil corporation, E.N.I., had reached an accord with North Viet nam on offshore prospecting in the Gulf of Tonkin.
SEOUL, South Korea, Mayl 16 (AP)—Israel defeated Japan 2‐1, and South Vietnam stopped Thailand, 1‐0, today and advanced to Group A competition in the World Cup Asian group soccer preliminary tournament.
SEOUL, South Korea, Mai 16 (AP)—Israel defeated Japan 2‐1, and ‘South Vietnam; stopped Thailand, 1‐0, today and advanced to Group A corn—; petition in..the WOrld Cup Asian, group, soccer preliminary tournament.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 16 (UPI)—A South Vietnamese antiwar leader will be turned over to the Communists because she had “close liaison with the Communists,” a Government spokesman said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 16 (AP)—The Saigon command reported today that its troops had attacked Communist soldiers who were moving large quantities of arms near the central coast and killed 49 of them.
WASHINGTON, May 16—The Senate Foreign Relations Committee has deferred a vote on President Nixon's nomination of Graham A. Martin as Ambassador to South Vietnam until he can testify on reported’ interference in the internal affairs of Italy when he was Ambassador there, a committee spokesman said today.
LA PAZ, Mexico, May 17 (AP) — Maj. Gen. Charles F. Widdecke, U.S.A., retired, commander of the First Marine Corps Division in Vietnam, died Sunday in a hospital after suffering a heart ‘attack in a fishing boat a month ago. He was 54 years old.
PARIS, May 17—The United States and North Vietnam today, bvan a series of talks here on him to end violations of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 17 (AP)—North Vietnam agreed today that a United States military team could visit Hanoi again tomorrow to inspect the graves a number of Americans who died while prisoners of war.

WASHINGTON, May 17 (AP) —The Defense Department today changed the status of three Army sergeants in Southeast :Asia from captured or missing to dead by hostile action. One of them was S. Sgt. Walter Ferguson Jr. of Brooklyn, who had ‘been listed as captured.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 18 (AP)—The United States Embassy disclosed today that a 24th American serviceman had been found to have been buried in North Vietnam. A spokesman said the serviceman had died in an air crash.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 18 (Reuters)—Col. Nguyen Van Ve, replaced in 1971 as director of South Vietnam's Con Son Island prison after an international controversy over “tiger‐cage” punishment cells, has been reappointed to the same post, Government officials said today.
VINH LONG, South Vietnam, May 16 — When the urgent message came the Hungarians were fishing, the Indonesians were playing badminton with a Vietnamese secretary in hot pants and gold high‐heeled shoes, and the Poles were watching.
PARIS; May 18 (AP)—Henry A. Kissinger, met today for second time with Le Duc Tho of North Vietnain to discuss the carrying out of the Vietnam peace agreement
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 18 (AP) — The South Vietnamese command said today that the Communists had battered the western defenses of Hue with nearly 600 rounds of artillery, using long‐range 130‐mm. guns. It was the first reported use of the big guns since the ceasefire nearly four months ago.
First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. lost another battle last week but he hasn't given up the, struggle. Calley is the only person convicted of the mass‐killings at the vietnamese hamlet of My Lai in 1968, and the Army‐Air Foree Clemeney and Parole Board had recommended that his 20‐year prison sentence, be reduced to 17 years. Last Monday, however, on his final, day in office, the Secretary of the Army, Robert Froehlke, turner dOwn the. recommendation. On Tuesday he was succeeded by Howard Callaway, a Georgia businessman, and Calley's attorney announced immediately that the petition for clemency would be renewed. Calley has been confined to his apartment at Fort Benning, Ga., for two years while making the appeals.
PARIS—Like the word “Vietnam” with which it has curiously managed to get entangled, “Watergate” has developed into a sort of code symbol for Americans’ disgruntlement with themselves, their leaders and their destiny, disgruntlement on a scale transcending both in scope and in intensity even the sordid tragicomedy itself.
Kissinger and Chou En‐lai keep shaking hands and smiling. Americans, for the first time in a decade, seem largely relieved of the burden of Vietnam. The Japanese happily set up an embassy in Peking. Russians, Japanese and Americans talk seriously about billions of dollars of possible investments in Siberia. Even North and South Koreans have exchanged delegations and begun to talk about peaceful unification. The future in East Asia seems, indeed, pleasing.
PARIS, May 19 (Reuters)—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam held their third meeting in three days here today to discuss ways of carrying out the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
Although the worst may be yet to come in the Watergate crisis, the news from Washington is not all bad. While the Executive slips into deeper:. disarray, a rejuvenated Congress has begun to move with remarkable determination and unity of purpose to restore the balance of power that the Founding Fathers had perceptively prescribed to check excesses of any branch of the ]Federal Government.’
SEATTLE, May 19—The G.I. Bill of Rights, which helped educate and house World War II and Korean War veterans, is inadequate to the needs of the six million Vietnam war veterans and must be drastically revised, according to a report, that will be submitted to the White House.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 19 (AP)—The start of an investigation into alleged United States air attacks in South Vietnam was called off today, And the Communists boycotted la meeting of the four‐party Joint Military Team called to make arrangements to return the remains of American dead.
NORFOLK, Va., May 19—President Nixon said today that Hanoi had “persisted in violations” of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement and had failed to provide adequate information about the fate of missing American servicemen.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 19 (Agence FrancePresse)—Meetings were held today throughout the country to celebrate the 83d anniversary of the birth of the late President Ho Chi Minh.
WASHINGTON—To the extent we've been given a reason, the Administra, tion's war in Cambodia has been explained as implementing the “agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in Vietnam.” The explanation wants both law and logic.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 19 (Agence France‐Presse)—A widespread campaign of selfcriticism has been going on in the production sector for several weeks and it was taken up this week by the party newspaper Nhan Dan, which severely criticized the value of official North Vietnamese statistics.
PARIS, May 20—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho left continuing Vietnam cease‐fire talks to their deputies today amid indications that both sides were sticking to their hard initial positions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 20 — President Nguyen Van Thieu announced an ambitious new eight‐year plan tonight for the reconstruction and economic development of South Vietnam, declaring that the “danger of the renewal of war” appeared to be receding.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 20 — President Nguyen Van. Thieu announced an ambitious new eight‐year plan tonight for the reconstruction and economic development of South Vietnam declaring that the “danger of the renewal of war” appeared to be receding.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—Thirty years of war have filled Vietnam's hospitals with tattered, scarred, and burned limbs ready for plastic surgery. But plastic surgeons are finding it more lucrative to run cosmetic surgery clinics for wealthy Saigonese.
WASHINGTON, May 21 (AP) — The Senate adopted a resolution today dedicating Memorial Day next Monday as a special commemorative day for “the 359,879 dead and wounded members of the armed forces whose loss and suffering were occasioned by the war in Vietnam.”
BANGKOK, Thailand, May 21 (AP) — There is no indication that any Americans listed as missing in action in Southeast Asia are still alive, the general in charge of locating them said today.
WASHINGTON, May 21 —The Vietnam Veterans Against the War called on the Internal Security Division of the Justice Department today to make public any information it had gathered on the antiwar organization.
WASHINGTON, May 21—James W. McCord Jr. sent John J. Caulfield, a former White House aide, an unsigned letter shortly before the Watergate trial warning that if the Nixon Administration persisted in an attempt to depict the bugging operations as inspired by the Central Intelligence Agency, he. would “bring the house down,” sources close to the case said today.
PARIS, May 21 (AP)—American and North Vietnamese negotiators have made “some progress” in their talks on ways to enforce the shaky Vietnam peace agreement, Henry A. Kissinger said today.
To the Editor:
PARIS, May 22—As American‐North Vietnamese talks here appeared to be nearing an end, William H. Sullivan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, left by air for Saigon tonight.
WASHINGTON, May 22 (AP) —President Nixon will address more than 500 returned Vietnam war prisoners at the State Department Thursday afternoon before a White House dinner in their honor that night. The White House said today that Mr. Nixon would welcome the former P.O.W.'s in the main auditorium of the State Department at 2:30 P.M. and then greet each man in a receiving line.
PARIS ‐Henry Kissinger's latest Paris visit for the old familiar reason of still more Vietnam talks had an interesting by‐product. He discovered that although Europeans were far less alarmist than the vast majority of Americans about the international implications of Watergate, Europeonever theless really didn't think too much of his Easter Monday speech urging “new Atlantic charter.”
WASHINGTON, May 22 (AP) —Yielding to a Vietnam veterans group's lawsuit, the Nixon Administration said today that it would free $25‐million for a new veterans ’ education program.
The acquittal of seventeen members of the “Camden 28” and the prosecution's recommendation for diimissal of charges against the remaining eleven defendants clearly part of a growing revulsion against abuse of governmental power. The anti‐war protesters had been arrested in 1971 while breaking into a Federal building and destroying draft records. Since they subsequently admitted their action in ,court, their acquittal constitutes something of a legal landmark: it was based on the jury's finding that—though the defendants were guilty—their offense was dwarfed by the Government's deliberate use of an agent provocateur to assure the commission rather than the prevention of a crime.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 23—William H. Sullivan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, arrived here tonight for discussions with South Vietnamese officials on how to carry out the Paris peace Agreement.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 21—The destruction Cambodia has multiplied greatly since the escalation of the American bombing began here in February. Scores of villages have been blown away. Twelve‐foot‐deep bomb craters pock the ruins. Great numbers of livestock have been killed, harvested crops burned to ash, orchards destroyed—all creating a degree of damage, and therefore a reconstruction problem, that until now had been associated only with North and South Vietnam.
LOC NINH, South Vietnam, May 23 (AP)—The town nestles amid rubber trees just an hour's helicopter ride from Saigon. Its streets are muddy like any other South Vietnamese town in the monsoon season. Barefooted children wave at foreigners passing by.
The United States Flag Foundation gave its annual award yesterday to all the returned prisoners of the Vietnam war, according to United Press International. The foundation was founded in 1898. It publishes ilterature on flag history and the flag code and has fought several flagdesecration cases successfully in the courts.
PARIS, May 23—The United States and North Vietnam today ended an intensive week of talks on how to end violations of the Vietnam cease‐fire, and Henry A. Kissinger said “significant progress” had been made.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 21—The destruction Cambodia has multiplied greatly since the escalation of the American bombing began here in February. Scores of villages have been blown away. Twelve‐foot‐deep bomb craters pock the ruins. Great numbers of livestock have been killed, harvested crops burned to ash, orchards destroyed—all creating a degree of damage, and therefore reconstruction problem, that until now had been associated ‘,only with North and South Vietnam.
DAYTON, Pa.—Wendell Alcorn has been gone a long time.
WASHINGTON, May 23—Senator James L. Buckley gave a reception today for 38 released war prisoners, and offered his views on wiretapping, Representative Mario Biaggi, Governor Rockefeller, the news media, Watergate, the Ellsberg‐Russo case and the Federal Bureau of Investigation in a series of brief interviews between the bloody Mary's and the raspberry sherbet.
PARIS, May 23—The United States and North Vietnam today ended an intensive week of talks on how to end violations of the Vietnam cease‐fire, and Henry A. Kissinger said “significant progress” had been made.
Arthur R. Taylor, president of the Columbia Broadcasting System, yesterday broke a long silence on the matter and defended C.B.S.'s decision last March to postpone indefinitely) presentation of the controversial play “Sticks and Bones” on television.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 24 (AP) — William H. Sullivan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, conferred with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam for an hour today on proposals to enforde the Vietnam cease‐fire. Mr, Sullivan then met with Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam for further discussions.
WASHINGTON, May 24—President Nixon, in a spiritec address to about 610 cheering former prisoners of war, lashes out today at those who threater the secrecy of national security matters.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 24—Hungarian and Polish officials of the International Commission of Control and Supervision said today they “strongly suspected” that two commission helicopters that crashed last month in Vietcong territory were also on an unauthorized reconnaissance flight for the United States Central Intelligence Agency.
With the fingertips of his right hand on a copy of the Old Testament, Ephraim Katzir was sworn in as Israel's fourth President. The new President, who was born in the Soviet Union, changed his name from Katchalsky after he was elected in April by the Knesset to the office, which is virtually powerless and largely ceremonial. Mr. Katzir, 57 years old, is the youngest President in Israel's 25 years as an independent nation. Mr. Katzir, in private life a prominent biochemist, said at his swearing‐in in Jerusalem that “as long as peace has not arrived, we shall be forced to act as in the days of Nehemiah—the sword in one hand, the ploughshare in the other I'm a little bit excited, hoping for the best. I'm hoping that things will turn out all right in the future.” At a reception after the ceremony, Mr. Katzir greeted guests as he stood beside Premier
WASHINGTON, May 24 (UPI) —President Nixon is described as “Richard the Lionhearted” in a plaque that Vietnam prisoners of war presented to him today at a White House gathering in their honor. The inscription reads: “Presented to Richard M. Nixon, May 1973.” Above a heraldic lion is the inscription: “Our leader—our comrade Richard the Lionhearted.”
WASHINGTON, May 24 —Following are excerpts from the remarks of President Nixon at a reception today for returned prisoners of war:
WASHINGTON, May 24 —Edward R. Sowders, a veteran of the Vietnam war who deserted from the Army in 1970, appeared before an informal House hearing on amnesty today to announce that he would surrender to military authorities.
Relatives and friends of some of the 1,359 American servicemen listed as missing in action in Southeast Asia urged local congressmen yesterday to see to it that both the United States and North Vietnam made greater efforts to resolve the status of the men.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, May 26 — William H. Sullivan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Eastern and Pacific Affairs, left Saigon this morning after three days of talks with South Vietnamese Government officials on carrying out the cease‐fire.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., May 25 (AP)—President Nixon issued today a Memorial Day proclamation calling for the nation to unite in prayer for permanent peace. And he ordered flags flown at half‐staff for Americans who died in Vietnam.
Relatives and friends of some of the 1,359 American service. men listed as missing in action in Southeast Asia urged local congressmen yesterday to see to it that both the United States and North Vietnam made greater efforts to resolve the status of the men.
L. Patrick Gray 3d, the former acting director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a figure in the Watergate affair, is expected to return to private law practice in New London, Conn. Mr. Gray resigned from the F.B.I. on April 27 after the Senate had delayed confirming his appointment as the ageney's permanent director and after it was disclosed that he had destroyed papers related to the Watergate scandal. In New London, Louis C. Wool, a partner in the film of Suisman, Shapiro, Wool & Brennan, said Mr. Gray would rejoin the firm as a ,partner. “It could be next: week,” said Mr. Wool. “It could be the week after he is going to elect his own Cane.” Mr. Gray left the firm in December, 1970, to become an assistant attorney general in Washington. He has a, home in Stonington, Conn.
Patrick O'Malley—son, grandson, nephew of New York police officers —is in Vietnam talking to his black buddy and fellow medic, Kenyon, about life and sex and race, grasping for a philosophy as desperate men always do. Kenyon gives Patrick a test for the measure of a man: “Why just that he keeps trying to find out things, I guess. That he don't go shutting no doors he never has even tried to open.”
PARIS—Four months after the triumphant completion of a Vietnam cease‐fire accord, Presidential adviser Henry Kissinger and Hanoi's Le Due Tho were back in Paris holding intensive negotiations on how to make it work. They met for 30 hours over seven days, said they achieved “significant progress” and arranged for another series of Paris talks to begin on June 6.
OTTAWA, May 26—With a decision expected in the next few days, a majority of Canada's Cabinet reportedly favors ordering the Canadian peace‐keeping force out of Vietnam, ending a four‐month “exercise in frustration.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 26—United States intelligence analysts say they believe the likelihood of a North Vietnamese offensive in the near future diminishing and that it appears the Communists intend to concentrate instead on political activity.
We started school back in the Middle Eisenhower Period, toddlers’ paws in ours, crossing at the marked intersection under the stern benignity of good Officer Riley, who was doomed a dozen years later to become bad pig cop to a lot of those kids—we always called them kids then — to whom he taught survival. The nineteen‐sixties were lurking out there, though we ‐didn't suspect it, of course, never guessed at the future of hair, grass, Beatles, cop hate, Vietnam, televised state murders waiting out there in the future to shame us and shape the people our toddlers were going to become.
If the picture in South Vietnam is one of receding war, the opposite is true of Cambodia. In a lengthy dispatch last week from Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, New York Times correspondent Sydney H. Schanberg had this to report:
SAIGON—A kind of peace may be dawning in South Vietnam. At least for the immediate future, the Communists seem to have decided to try to achieve their goals by political rather than military means.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 27—About 1,000 American civilian technicians and construction workers are living in Vietnam illegally. Their jobs with United States defense contractors were closed out recently as part of the Vietnamization program, but the 1,000 do not want to go home.
NEW HAVEN — The Watergate tragedy is stirring the nation's instinct for constitutional respoisibility, After years of erasion, or worse, on the ‘part of many participants in the process of government, it is surely a time to review political problems in the light of first principles.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 28 (UPI)—The International Commission of Control and Supervision ended its fourth month today with two of its members, Hungary and Poland, giving way on an issue that has deadlocked two previous commission meetings and brought a threat of a Canadian and Indonesian walkout.
SAIGON, South Vietnam May 28—The Hanoi Hilton—the ironic name captured American pilots gave their prison in North Vietnam—is gone. But if a group of architects and businessmen here have their way there will soon be a real, gleaming white Saigon Hilton Hotel, with 500 rooms.
CANTON, Ohio, May 28 (UPI) —Stark County commemorated its war dead today and paid tribute to Sharon Lane, the first American servicewoman killed in Vietnam. Miss Lane was 25‐year‐old first lieutenant in the Army Nurse Corps when she was fatally wounded at Chu Lai in June, 1969. A bronze statue of Miss Lane was dedicated on the grounds of Altman Hospital here. She was a graduate of the Altman School of Nursing.
WASHINGTON, Mayo 28,—President Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger will meet with Congressional leaders tomorrow to discuss foreign affairs developMents—including the negotiations with North Vietnam to achieve stricter observance of the tour‐month‐old cease‐fire agreement.
OTTAWA, May 29—The Canadian Government, maintaining that its cease‐fire observers in Vietnam were not being permitted to do their job properly, announced today that it had decided to bring them home within 60 days.
WASHINGTON, May 29—Opponents of the United States bombing of Cambodia won a key procedural test on the Senate floor today in their effort to cut off funds for the air war.
WASHINGTON, May 29—Henry A. Kissinger said today that he expected to conclude “new.understandings” with Hanoi next week to strengthen the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement. In a news conference. at the White House, President Nixon's adviser on national security made his first comments on his current round of talks with Hanoi's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho.
WASHINGTON, May 29—Henry A. Kissinger said today that he expected to conclude “new understandings” with Hanoi next week to strengthen the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement. In a news conference, at the White House, President Nixon's adviser on national security made his first comments on his current round of talks with Hanoi's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 29 — President Nguyen Van Thieu today indicated for the first time that he was concerned that the Watergate scandal might have affected American polcy toward South Vietnam.
LOS ANGELES, May 29 (UPI) —William O. Wooldridge, once the Army's top‐ranked enlisted man, was given five year's probation today on a bribery charge. He was also ordered to sign over most of his assets, to the Government and to work for three years without pay for a charitable organization.

OTTAWA, May 29—The Canadian Government, maintaining that its cease‐fire observers in Vietnam were not being permitted to do their job properly, announced today that it had de cided to bring them home with in 60 days.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, May 31—The South Vietnamese miiltary command today announced a Communist tank attack on a Government outpost west of Hue, but informed United States sources said they had no knowledge of such an assault.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 30 (UPI)—American spotter planes and fighter‐bombers helped conduct a convoy of 10 barges and empty fuel tankers safely down the Mekong River to the Vietnamese border today, naval sources said. The United States warplanes flew cover after the convoy came under fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 30—Canada's decision to withdraw from the International Commission of Control and Supervision will not mean the end of the commission, but it will probably be the end of the effort the Canadians sponsored to make the commission into an active and effective investigative body. This is the view of most experienced South Vietnamese and Western officials here, who regretted the announcement from Ottawa that Canada would pull her 290member delegation out of the commission within 60 days, by July 31.
WASHINGTON, May 30—Norway and Brazil are among orations under consideration to replace Canada on the fournation cease‐fire commission in Vietnam, a Nixon Administration official said today.
Prisoners of war charged by Col. Theodore W. Guy with collaborating with the enemy said, yesterday, some through spokesmen, that they had not helped the North Vietnamese any more than most prisoners had done.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 30 —South Vietnam's foreignexchange reserves are plummeting and both American and South Vietnamese economists are worried.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 30—South Vietnam's foreignexchange reserves are plummeting and both American and South Vietnamese economists are worded.
BOSTON, May 30—On 85 successive days now, without any authority in law, American planes have bombed Cambodia. The latest official figures, for April, showed that the average daily tonnage had risen to nearly one and one‐half the amount dropped on North Vietnam during the Christmas bombing campaign.
WASHINGTON, May 30—After a day of stalling, the Senate agreed today to vote by 5 P.M. tomorrow on a catchall spending bill that would cut off all funds for bombing in Cambodia. Supporters of the Administration planned to make a last‐ditch effort to soften the cut‐off of funds with amendments before the final vote tomorrow, but they were not optimistic.

PARIS, Dec. 31 — Vo Van Sung, North Vietnam's representative in Paris, asserted tonight that his country had won a “strategic victory” over American air power and called upon the United States to sign the nine‐point draft accord reached in October.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 —There were strong signs today that President Nixon's halt in bombing above the 20th Parallel in North Vietnam had brought him little, if any, respite from Congressional criticism of his Vietnam policies.
President Nixon's decision to stop the bombing North Vietnam north of the Twentieth Parallel and send Henry Kissinger back to Paris signals a return to sanity that will be greeted with relief throughout the nation and the world. As French Foreign Minister Maurice Schumann remarked: “Hope is reborn.”
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 31—The people of Hanoi were able to get a full night's sleep last night for the first time since the United States bombing began two weeks ago.
ROME, Dec. 31—Pope Paul VI, though suffering from influenza, made a public appearance today to welcome as “a ray of light” the end of the United States bombing raids on North Vietnam and the planned resumption of peace talks.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 — There were strong signs today that President Nixon's halt in bombing above the 20th Parallel in North Vietnam had brought him little, if any, respite from Congressional criticism of his Vietnam policies.
Shrouded in fog and dampened by a steady drizzle, about 100 antiwar protesters gathered near St. Patrick's Cathedral in midtown Manhattan yesterday to hear the Rev. Daniel Berrigan offer a prayer of thanks to God for the bombing halt above North Vietnam's 20th parallel.
LONDON, Dec. 31—Fragment found in a dusty future corner of a time machine:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 1—There were indications today that the United States had temporarily halted all bombing in both North and South Vietnam in observance of a 24‐hour New Year's Day cease‐fire proclaimed by both the Communists and the Saigon Government.
Official confirmation of a 24‐hour New Year's Day bombing halt throughout all of Vietnam was expected from the United States command in Saigon. Spokesmen for the command were refusing to confirm the pause during the day, apparently following a pattern established when the command announced a 36‐hour Christmas pause after it had passed. The pause was in observance of a New Year's Day cease‐fire proclaimed by both the Communists and the Saigon Government. [Page 1, Column 8.]
There is no compelling logic to celebrating the start of the New Year on the first day of January. The early Egyptians began the new cycle in September; the ancient Greeks in June. New Englanders for a while stuck to Christmas Day, Dec. 25. The Jewish New Year fluctuates between September and October. It was only in the course of the eighteenth century that Germany, Russia, England and Sweden officially adopted Jan. 1 as New Year's Day. A small child, asked when the New Year begins, is more likely to cite his or her own birthday as the consequential turn.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 31—The people of Hanoi were able to get a full night's sleep last night for the first time since the United States bombing began two weeks ago.
Four Americans who returned from Hanoi Sunday night with hundreds of letters from American prisoners of war described yesterday as overwhelming the destruction they had seen in the city as a result of United States bombing raids.
B‐52's have been shot down, and this turn of events Is bound to shake up the outlook of our big‐bomber crews. Perhaps the outlook can stand a little shaking up, and I say this after having talked with a number of B‐52 fliers home on leave before the start of our latest blitz. Their mentality, I found, was that of men who considered themselves above the battle, so to speak, of operatives who felt that theirs was but to do while others died.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 1—The announcement that the United. States and North Vietnam would resume their private peace talks in Paris next Monday has prompted a cool reaction here among supporters of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
Any time the President and Congress have a falling out over money, the American economy subject to their joint stewardship is bound to be caught in a political cross‐fire. America's last crisis of economics was provoked by the guerrilla war in Vietnam. The possibility that America may be entrapping herself in a new domestic guerrilla war in Washington has now become a clear and present danger.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 2 — American warplanes this afternoon resumed their raids in South Vietnam and in North Vietnam below the 20th Parallel after 36‐hour pause to observe a New Year's Day cease‐fire, American officials indicated.
ANDERSEN AIR FORCE BASE, Guam, Jan. 1—The halt in the intensive American bombing of North Vietnam has brought a touch of relief, but only a little let‐up in action to the B‐52 flight and ground crews here.
DACCA, Bangladesh, Jan. 1 (Reuters)—Two people were killed today and six injured, one critically, when the police opened fire on students demonstrating against American bombing in North Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 1 (Agence France‐Presse) —It was a somber New Year's Eve here in Hanoi, its streets deserted and its shutters closed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 1—The announcement that the United States and North Vietnam would resume their private peace talks in Paris next Monday has prompted a cool, reaction here among supporters of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 2 — American warplanes today continued their temporary halt in the bombing begun yesterday in North Vietnam below the 20th Parallel and in South Vietnam to observe a New Year's Day cease‐fire, United States officials indicated.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 1—It is in very poor taste to go around talking about bombing all the time. If there is some bombing going on, it is unfortunate, particularly if innocent people are being hurt. Nobody likes to see innocent people hurt, but sometimes it cannot be helped. “You have to break a few eggs to make an omelette,” as someone once said, maybe Lenin.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Jan. 1 (AP)—A group of about 400 antiwar demonstrators niarched six blocks today to the home of Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachusetts, with a list of demands for the coming session of Congress. But Mr. O'Neill, who is expected to be the new majority leader in the. House, was in Washington and the demonstrators had to hand over the list of demands to his son.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 2—Congressional opponents of the war in Vietnam threatened today to try to cut off appropriations for the war if the Nixon Administration did not quickly obtain peace settlement.
PARIS, Jan. 2—Technical experts from the United States and North Vietnam resumed their discussions on a cease‐fire today with a four‐hour session and agreed to meet again tomorrow.
LOUISVILLE, Ky., Jan 2 (AP)—The Louisville Courier‐Journal in its Wednesday morning editions endorsed peaceful antiwar demonstrations at the inauguration of President Nixon Jan. 20.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 3 (AP)—United States bombers struck at supply routes in the southern panhandle of North Vietnam yesterday in a resumption of bombing after a 36‐hour New Year pause.
To the Editor:
PARIS, Jan. 2—Technical experts from the United States and North Vietnam resumed their discussions on a cease‐fire today with a four‐hour session and agreed to meet again tomorrow.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 2 (Agence France‐Presse) —The city of Hanoi, though still two–thirds empty, timidly began getting back to normal today after 12 days of heavy American bombing raids.
PARIS—When President Nixon received French Foreign Minister Maurice Schumann last September he said he wanted to end the Indochina war before his reinauguration (which he already expected) in order to wipe clean the diplomatic slate for major negotiations with Western Europe and Japan.
Pentagon spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim hit a new low in official obfuscation yesterday when he conceded that “some limited accidental damage” was sustained by Hanoi's Bach Mai Hospital during the recently suspended United States aerial blitz. Mr. Friedheim said that information indicating damage to the hospital had reached him after he had denied any damage on Dec. 27 and again on Dec. 29.
ROME, Jan. 2—The United States bombing strikes in North Vietnam have caused a wave of anti‐American feeling in Italy that the halt of the raids above the 20th Parallel has not stopped.
Ten persons were arrested yesterday on charges of disorderly conduct during a demonstration against the Riverside Research Institute at 80 West End Avenue.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 2 — A Pentagon spokesman confirmed today for the first time reports of damage to the Bach Mai Hospital and Gia Lam Airport in Hanoi during heavy air raids last month over North Vietnam but he denied that the damage was either massive or intentional.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 2—Congressional opponents of the war in Vietnam threatened today to try to cut off appropriations for the war if the Nixon Administration did not quickly obtain a peace settlement.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 2 — A Pentagon spokesman confirmed today for the first time reports of damage to the Bach Mai Hospital and Gia Lam Airport in Hanoi during heavy air raids last month over North Vietnam but he denied that the damage was either massive or intentional.
BALTIMORE, Jan. 2—A Federal grand jury indicted today a 31‐year‐old North Carolina man who the Government has said was “a functionary” in conspiracy to smuggle Asian heroin into the country in the coffins or in the cadavers of American servicemen killed in Vietnam.
The refusal of Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Presidential aide Henry A. Kissinger to discuss with key Congressional committees the status of war and peace in Indochina is, as Senator Fulbright has caustically observed, disappointing but “not unusual.”
Stock prices rose sharply yesterday to open the market's new year, with buying based on expectations of a robust economy in 4973 and renewed hopes for the Vietnam peace talks.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 3 —In the modern, almost antiseptic Federal Building downtown here, thousands of miles from Vietnam, the final act of the Pentagon papers case began to unfold today with the start of jury selection in the trial of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony J. Russo Jr. They are accused of espionage.
Stock prices soared to record levels yesterday, fed by the booming domestic economy and by hopes for the Vietnam peace talks. The Dow‐Jones industrial average climbed 12.12 to finish at 1,043.80. The average has gained more than 36 points in three sessions. Yesterday, 20.63 million shares were sold on the New York Stock Exchange. Page 53.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3—The 93d Congress convened today amid pledges by the Senate Democratic leader to “bring about complete disinvolvement” from the Vietnam war and by the Democratic Speaker of the House to demonstrate independence from the Republican Administration.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3—Antiwar protesters from 40 states gathered here today to participate in a two‐day religious conference aimed at putting pressure on Congress to cut off funds for military operations in Vietnam.
PARIS, Jan. 3—As American and North Vietnamese representatives met for the second day today on the technical aspects of a cease‐fire, North Vietnam said the United States had halted its mining as well as its bombing north of the 20th Parallel.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3—The 93d Congress convened today amid pledges by the Senate Democratic leader to “bring about complete disinvolvement” from the Vietnam war and by the Democratic Speaker of the House to demonstrate independence from the Republican Administration.
Whatever its impact on the negotiating position of the other side, it is now clear that President Nixon's 12‐day aerial blitz against North Vietnam has had a backlash at home that cannot but affect the American bargaining stance. When Henry Kissinger returns to the Paris talks, he will have, in addition to Presidents Nixon and Thieu, an aroused Congress looking over his shoulder.
ASHEVILLE, N.C., Jan, 3 (AP)—Responding to criticism that he had not publicly “interceded” with President Nixon to stop the bombing of North Wetnam, the Rev. Billy Grahamsaid today that he hoped for a rapid and just peace in Southeast Asia.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 3—Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony J. Russo Jr. are such different men that, but for the accident of their being in Vietnam at the same time, one might be surprised to find them co‐defendants.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3—High Administration officials said today that the United States was entering the negotiations with North Vietnam next week without assuranees that an early settlement of the Vietnam war would be achieved.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3—High Administration officials said today that the United States was entering the negotiations with North Vietnam next week without assurances that an early settlement of the Vietnam war would be achieved.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 4 (AP)—Supply routes and other targets in the southern part of North Vietnam were heavily attacked again yesterday by United States planes, among them B‐52 heavy bombers.
Stock prices soared to record levels yesterday, fed by the booming domestic economy and by hopes for the Vietnam peace talks. The Dow‐Jones industrial average climbed 12.12 to finish at 1,043.80. The average has gained more than 36 points in three sessions. Yesterday, 20.63 million shares were sold on the New York Stock Exchange. Page 53.
To the Editor:
SYDNEY, Australia, Jan. 3—Anti‐American statements by a member of Prime Minister Gough Whitlam's new Cabinet, coming on top of other disturbing developments in the normally tranquil relations between the United States and Australia, have irked the United States Embassy.
One of the central issues—if not the central issue—facing the renewed peace talks. Monday seems to be South Vietnam's demand, apparently backed by the United States, that any accord recognize and support the continuing existence of two Vietnams.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 4—The 93d Congress is back in the capital spouting New Year's resolutions and promising, like a repentant drunk, to give up its feckless ways.
PARIS, Jan. 4—The four‐party Vietnam peace conference resumed here today, and the Vietnamese Communists accused the United States of seeking to perpetuate the division of Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 4—Congressional Democrats continued today to make speeches and approve resolutions against President Nixon's war policy, but leaders acknowledged that there was no prospect of immediate passage of legislation that would end the war.
TOKYO, Jan. 4 — North Vietnam said today that a preliminary survey showed that 1,318 persons were killed and 1,261 wounded by United States bombing raids on Hanoi last month.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 4—Singing, “We will lay down our swords and shields, down by the riverside,” a religious conference wound up two days of activities today aimed at putting pressure on Congress to cut off funds for the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 5 — The United States command reported yesterday that another B‐52 —the 16th since Dec. 18 — had been lost to North Vietnamese antiaircraft fire.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 4—Secretary of State William P. Rogers has expressed official concern to the Australian Government over the Australian maritime unions' boycott of American shipping in response to the American bombing of North Vietnam.
PARIS — Where is the difference? Between the devastation of Guernica by the planes of Hitler and the devastation of Hanoi by those of Mr. Nixon, where is the difference? Between the raids of terror over Hanoi to force the Vietnamese to surrender and the raids of terror over Warsaw to force the Polish, over Rotterdam to force the Dutch to surrender, over Coventry to force the British (but Churchill did not surrender and the Vietnamese do not) where is the difference? Between the shredded infants of Spain and the shredded infants of Hanoi? At the time of Guernica, Warsaw, Rotterdam and Coventry what raised the world's conscience with a sacred horror was the recurrence, by the will of one man and his military advisers, of the most barbarous, the cruelest, the most horrifying, the most homicidal means to win a political design. It was the return to Sardanapalus and to Nero multiplied by ten, multiplied by a hundred. The world fought five years against that, against the incredible return of forgotten practices, that one thought had disappeared forever. America was not the least fierce nor the least sincere in that struggle to establish between nations a minimum of civilized relations. It was America which by its initiative (the creation of the U.N.) showed most visibly that will of healing. And now it is America today that brings back Guernica, Warsaw, Rotterdam—that brings us the equivalent of Hiroshima. In order to make an adversary surrender and to make a political design succeed.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 4—Secretary of State William P. Rogers has expressed official concern to the Australian Government over the Australian maritime unions' boycott of American shipping in response to the American bombing of North Vietnam.
The United States command in Saigon reported yesterday that the 16th B‐52 since Dec. 18 had been lost in the air war over North Vietnam. Details on page 2.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 5 — The United States command reported yesterday that another B‐52 —the 16th since Dec. 18 — had been lost to North Vietnamese antiaircraft fire.
The United States command in Saigon reported yesterday that the 16th B‐52 since Dec. 18 had been lost in the air war over North Vietnam. Details on page 2.
PARIS, Jan. 4—The four‐party Vietnam peace conference resumed here today, and the Vietnamese Communists accused the United States of seeking to perpetuate the division of Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 4 — Apparently concerned by the threat of an aroused United States Congress to cut off spending for the Vietnam war, President Nguyen Van Thieu is sending a delegation of five South Vietnamese senators to Washington, it was disclosed today.
CHICAGO, Jan. 4—Six Protestant, Roman Catholic and Jewish religious leaders announced today that they would travel to Rome week to seek the aid of Pope Paul VI in mobilizing world opinion against American war activities in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 4 — Apparently concerned by the threat of an aroused, United Slates Congress to cut off spending for the Vietnam war. President Nguyen Van Thieu is sending a delegation of five South Vietnamese senators to Washington, it was disclosed today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Jan. 4 (UPI)—The United States military command reported today that five Americans were killed in action in the Vietnam war last week. Thirteen were wounded and 24 listed as missing, captured or interned, the command said.
SURFERS PARADISE, Australia, Jan. 4 (UPI)—A retired United States Army Colonel, David H. Hackworth; the most decorated officer of the Vietnam war, said today that he was working as a waiter in a cafe in an Australian resort. And, he said, he likes it.
TOKYO, Jan. 4 — North Vietnam said today that a preliminary survey showed that 1,318 persons were killed and 1,261 wounded by United States bombing raids on Hanoi last month.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 4 (Agence France‐Presse)—Claude Chayet, France's new Delegate General to North Vietnam, arrived at his post yesterday and immediately toured parts of Hanoi destroyed in recent bombing raids, ineluding Bach Mai Hospital.
LONDON, Jan. 5 (AP) — A British charity said today that it was contributing $60,000 worth of surgical equipment and medical supplies to North Vietnam for the treatment of United. States bombing casualties. Christian Aid said a charter plane would leave Paris soon with the supplies.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5—Administration officials said today that the Soviet Union recently supplied North Vietnam, for the first time in the war, with a missile boat of the type employed by Egypt in 1967 to sink an Israeli destroyer.
PARIS, Jan. 5 (AP)—Technical experts of the United States and North Vietnam met today for the fourth day in a row on detailed points that could be part of an Indochina cease‐fire agreement. The major points must be worked out in sessions starting here Monday between Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser, and Le Duc Tho, a member of the Hanoi Politburo.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 6—Attacks by Communist troops in South Vietnam have risen to an unusually high level, but American intelligence officials say they have been “small in scale and significance.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 5 — The leader of a fiveman delegation of legislators whom President Nguyen Van Thieu is sending to Washington next week says their mission will be to persuade Congress to keep providing and even to increase American military and economic assistance to South Vietnam if there is no peace soon.
President Nixon told a bipartisan group of Congressional leaders at a White House breakfast yesterday that although he knew many of them objected to his Vietnam policies, he was determined to do what he regarded as necessary to achieve “a proper kind of settlement.” He said that he was neither optimistic nor pessimistic—only hopeful—about the prospects for a negotiated agreement in the cease‐fire talks, which resume on Monday between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Due Tho. [Page 1, Column 1.1
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5—Calling for an “inauguration of conscience,” two antiwar organizations announced plans today to co‐sponsor a demonstration in Washington on Saturday, Jan. 20, Inauguration Day.
WASHINGTON—Henry Kissinger's statement on the reasons for the failure of peace negotiations has made one thing perfectly clear. In the same way that we have been unable to explain the reason for American military involvement in South Vietnam, we are now unable to explain in precise detail the type of peace we are seeking. We ought not blame Mr. Kissinger or his fellow negotiator from North Vietnam for failure to achieve peace in Southeast Asia. The fact is that none of the combatants has compelling reasons to end the war at this time.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5 —President Nixon told a group of Republican and Democratic Congressional leaders today that although he knew many of them objected to his Vietnam policies, he was determined to do what he regarded as necessary to achieve “a proper kind of settlement.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5—President Nixon told a group of Republican and Democratic Congressional leaders today that although he knew many of them objected to his Vietnam policies, he was determined to do what he regarded as necessary to achieve “a proper kind of settlement.”
PLEASANTVILLE, N. Y.—He lives in a backwater Vermont town and works at a nearby ski resort as laborer and handyman. A sturdy, rough‐looking New Englander of about 60, his eyes narrow when he talks as though he were concealing a poker hand. But if you watch his face closely you see that they are hurt eyes, angry eyes.
OTTAWA, Jan. 5—The Canadian House of Commons voted unanimously today to deplore the recent United States air attacks on the Hanoi and Haiphong areas and to urge Washington to refrain from further bombing there.
BALTIMORE, Md., Jan. 5—The trial of a 31‐year‐old man believed linked to a ring allegedly using the bodies of Americans killed in Vietnam to smuggle heroin into the United States was set yesterday for March 12 by Federal Judge James R. Miller Jr.
CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa, Jan. 5—Almost three years ago a new sign in this city's Butterfly Cafe advised those without shirt or shoes to stay out. “Sooner or later,” a waitress explained, “those filthy kids get on your nerves.” She was referring to a small band of college students holding one of this wellgroomed city's few protests against the Vietnam War. Down the street Mayor Donald J. Canney was calling the American invasion of Cambodia “a reasonable step” and denouncing student protests that “produce a violence of their own.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 5—Spurred by President. Nguyen Van Thieu's last de cree requiring reorganization of South Vietnam's political parties within the next three months, a group of Roman Catholic politicians have created a new organization they call the Tu Do (Freedom) party.
Presidential Power and Responsibility
Last month the United States left the peace talks and launched the most intensive bombings in history. What President Johnson had rejected as uncivilized, President Nixon embraced, Reserving, so far, the use of nuclear weapons, he has applied the full force of United States air power to force Vietnam to accept his terms.
LONDON, Jan. 5 — An American banker who took a Christmas holiday in Europe said afterward, with rather a dazed air: “People kept asking me why we were bombing Hanoi. I did not know how to answer, or explain why people like me could not do anything about it.”
OTTAWA, Jan. 5—The Canadian House of Commons voted unanimously today to deplore the recent United States air attacks on the Hanoi and Haiphong areas and to urge Washington to refrain from further bombing there.
SYDNEY, Australia, Jan. 5 —Australians are sharply divided over the boycott of Americon shipping by extreme leftwing unions here in a protest against the bombing of North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON—It's far more popular these days to criticize President Nixon's bombing decision than to defend it. This is especially so when, after so many agonizing years of war, peace had seemed so tantalizingly near.
President Nixon told a bipartisan group of Congressional leaders at a White House breakfast yesterday that although he knew many of them objected to his Vietnam policies, he was determined to do what he regarded as necessary to achieve “a proper kind of settlement.” He said that he was neither optimistic nor pessimistic—only hopeful—about the prospects for a negotiated agreement in the cease‐fire talks, which resume on Monday between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho. [Page 1, Column 1.].
An advertisement in which 192 staff members of The New York Times urged Congress “to end immediately all American involvement in the Indochinese war” is published today in the News of the Week in Review section of The Times.
Allow the President to invade a neighboring nation, whenever he shall deem it necessary to repel an invasion, and you allow him to do so, whenever he may choose to say he deems it necessary for such purpose—and you allow hint to make war at pleasure. Study to see if you can fix any limit to his power in this respect.... If, today, he should choose to say he thinks it necessary to invade Canada, to prevent the British from invading us, how could you stop him? You may say to him, “I see no probability of the British invading us” but he will say to you “be silent; I see it, you don't.”
I WAS made seriously uncomfortable in the theater twice last week, both times by a naive strain of what I suppose we've got to call triumpha??ism. That is to say, I was twice asked to believe in much too easy a victory.
HAIPHONG, North Vietnam, Jan. 6—Recent American air raids virtually razed Haiphong's industrial zone, one of North Vietnam's biggest concentrations of factories.
Dr. Kissinger is off to Paris again, and if he is genuinely in search of compromise settlement of the war rather than a negotiated victory, everyone must wish him well. But what, it is fair to ask, has been gained since he and President Nixon broke off the talks in mid‐December and launched the massive carpet‐bombing of Hanoi?
When a judge and jury convene in San Francisco tomorrow to weigh air piracy charges against a young Vietnam veteran, they will sift through psychiatric evidence that underscores the difficulties of assessing the mental state of the nation's growing number of skyjackers.
Seven ships carrying Australian goods are tied up in United States ports from Boston to Tampa, as American longshoremen retaliate for an Australian boycott of American shipping.
A New Year's toast, in decaffeinated tea, to the vanishing liberal. Under heavy fire from absolutely everybody, the liberal craftily went out of existence some time ago; and the only people who still claim the title are conservative politicians, labor leaders for Nixon and Americans overseas.
The relief that millions in the United States and other nations felt over President Nixon's decision to halt, or rather to suspend, the terror raids against Hanoi and Haiphong has an ironic overtone. Its implication is that the more indiscriminate the weapons, the greater will be the appreciation when they are stilled. It is a policy of so escalating the pain that any let‐up gives the appearance of moderation and mercy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 6 (AP) — A shell exploded prematurely yesterday in one of the two 5‐inch guns of the guided missile destroyer Henry B. Wilson, injuring two crewmen, the United States command reported. A spokesman said today that the crewmen were not seriously hurt and were evacuated to an Army hospital in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam.
PARIS—Image is an inexact word to apply to a country's international status but nevertheless the concept has an ultimately vital effect in the arcane art of policy. This concept has now become primordial for the United States and it is obvious no democratic government can ignore its existence.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 6—The House Republican Conference voted 135 to 7 today to support the efforts of President Nixon to negotiate an end to the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 7 (Reuters) — American bombers raided the North Vietnamese panhandle again yesterday, the United States command said, striking targets near key junctions and storage areas of military equipment destined for the South.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 6 (AP)—President Nguyen Van Thieu has issued a decree giving the Government power over almost every kind of association.
PARIS, Jan. 6—Following, in an unofficial translation from the French, are excerpts from a statement made today by Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese negotiator, upon his arrival in Paris for the resumption of the private peace talks with Henry A. Kissinger:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 6—Christmas brought napalm from Santa and, for comic respite, the New Year brought Congress staggering back to Washington. We recognized the scene at once, out of Shakespeare: that gory business done with Duncan, enter the porter drunk and full of high silliness to calm the audience with laughter for a long haul of horror.
The writer of the following article is a professor of law at Columbia University MIA recently returned from a visit to Hanoi. A retired brigadier general, he was the chief United States counsel for the prosecution at the Nuremberg war crimes trials and is the author of several books, including “Nuremberg and Vietnam: An American Tragedy.”
WASHINGTON—While most Americans were preparing to ring in the new year, last Sunday night, President Nixon returned unexpectedly to the. White House from his weekend retreat at Camp David and retired well before midnight. At 7:30 A.M. on New Year's Day, he went to his oval office, found the door locked and summoned a startled White House policeman to let him in. This picture of the President, wandering alone through a nearly empty mansion on a festive holiday, seemed in keeping with the cloak of isolation in which Mr. Nixon has wrapped himself.
WASHINGTON—The United States Congress, like Carl Sandburg's fog, has grown accustomed to creeping into the capital on little cat feet. Thus it seemed that, comparatively speaking at least, the new 93d Congress had pounced, on Washington last week with the fury of a January storm.
A French reporter remarked to me, “When my country lost a war and most of an empire at Dien Bien Phu, we simply said, ‘We lost a war.’ Why is it that the United States cannot say that?”
PARIS, Jan. 6 — Le Duc Tho, North Vietnam's peace negotiator, arrived here today for further talks with Henry A. Kissinger and immediately displayed an uncompromising stance against what he described as “unreasonable” American demands.
PARIS, Jan. 7—Henry A. Kissinger arrived here tonight to resume the talks on a Vietnam settlement that were broken off last month amid accusations of obstructionist tactics from both the United States and North Vietnam.
To the Editor: While the actions of the Navy in the case of Gordon Rule are quite appropriately being called into question, the issue he seemed to have been so foolishly disciplined over—his objection to the appointment of Roy Ash—has not received the attention it deserves.
PHNOM PENH, Jan. 5—President Lon Nol says the Nixon Administration has promised Cambodia resolute support in the future for her fight against Communist aggression.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 7 (Agence France‐Presse)—A week after the biggest bombing raids Hanoi has experienced since the Indochina war began, clean‐up squads were still finding bodies in the rubble today.
LONDON, Jan. 7 —In the Washington cliché, 1973 was to be the Year of Europe. President Nixon and Henry Kissinger would repair America's economic and strategic relations with her old allies. As an earnest of that intention, the President would likely make a grand tour of Western Europe himself.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 8—United States B‐52's bombed highways, rivers and canals in the southern part of North Vietnam over the weekend in what was described as a campaign to keep war supplies from the enemy in South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
Any resemblance to reality In the following dispatch Is purely coincidental.
SYDNEY, Australia, Monday, Jan. 8—A prominent member of Prime Minister Gough Whitlam's Government has accused President Nixon of “false pretentions,” “double dealing” and “a mentality of thuggery” in his Vietnam policy.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass.—A peculiarly virulent combination of ill will and misunderstanding seems to plague all dealings between Vietnamese and Americans. Nowhere is the malaise more apparent than in the disastrous series of negotiations which ended last month.
WASHINGTON, Jan, 7 —The Department of Defense has conceded that the Navy broke the law governing Congressional appropriations of funds on three separate occasions by mismanagement, poor judgment, inadequate bookkeeping and the pressures of the Vietnam war.
The key to success in the peace talks which resume in Paris today lies not only in Hanoi, as the Administration has asserted, but in the White House. The end of the long American involvement in Indochina requires a tough but inescapable decision—a decision to acknowledge at last the United States cannot impose a political solution in Vietnam by any acceptable military means.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 7 —The Department of Defense has conceded that the Navy broke the law governing Congressional appropriations of funds on three separate occasions by mismanagement, poor judgment, inadequate bookkeeping and the pressures of the Vietnam war.
PARIS, Jan. 7—Henry A. Kissinger arrived here tonight to resume the talks on a Vietnam settlement that were broken off last month amid accusations of obstructionist tactics from both the United States and North Vietnam.
BEIRUT, Lebanon, Jan. 7—The Lebanese Government, after protests had been made in the press and in university circles, today suspended the deportation of an American academic who has militantly opposed United States policies in Vietnam and the Middle East. The case will be reviewed.
ROME, Jan. 7 (Reuters)—Pope Paul VI today expressed the hope that the resumed negotiations in Paris would bring a conclusive end to the war in Vietnam.
HONOLULU, Jan. 7 (UPI) —A former security guard of President Kennedy who was a much‐decorated Green Beret in Vietnam said today that he had become a conscientious objector and had set a “personal withdrawal” deadline of Jan. 15 from the Army.
“O Wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us “To see oursels as others see us! “It wad frae monie a blunder free us An' foolish notion.”
STOCKHOLM, Jan. 6 —Swedes are out this weekend enjoying the mildest winter in 300 years and gathering signatures on a petition backed by all political parties calling for an end to the Vietnam war.
Henry A. Kissinger arrived in Paris yesterday to resume the talks on a Vietnam settlement that were broken off last month amid accusations of obstructionist tactics from both the United States and North Vietnam. “We expect the talks this time will be serious and worthy of the yearnings of the people all over the world for an early end to the war,” Mr. Kissinger said on his arrival at Orly Airport. [Page 1, Column 8.]
A tit‐for‐tat battle over the Vietnam war between waterfront unions in the United States and Australia has been making a mess of relations between the two countries.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Tan., 8 (Agence France‐Presse)—The official Hanoi newspaper Nhan Dan said today that the Government and the ruling Communist party had adopted financial measures to ease the plight of those made homeless by American bombings. At the same time, Nhan Dan emphasized a need for personal and local initiative.
SYDNEY, Australia, Tuesday, Jan. 9 (AP)—The Australian Maritime Union today called off its boycott of United States shipping, imposed two weeks ago in protest over American bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 8 (UPI)— American military strength in Vietnam declined by 100 men and dropped to an over‐all total of 24,000 last week, but military sources said today that it might increase slightly before it declined once more.
PARIS, Jan. 8 — Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho resumed negotiations for a ceasefire here today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 8—The latest accidentalbombing incident of the Vietnam war is causing particular embarrassment here among American officers who have been defending the Navy and Air Force against Hanoi's charges of striking civilians.
Shakespeare Roles Get Equity Award
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 8 (UPI)—The lower house of Parliament today approved a bill sponsored by President Nguyen Van Thieu meant to help cut back the number of political parties.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 8 (AP)—North Vietnam announced today that hundreds of antiaircraft units had been formed by the home guard and militia in the Hanoi and Haiphong regions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 9 (AP) — Heavy United States air raids were continued yesterday against the southern part of North Vietnam in an effort to check the flow of men and material to Communist forces in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told the House Armed Services Committee today that “from a military standpoint, the Vietnamization program has been completed.”
Dispatches from Moscow said that Dr. Michael E. De Bakey had arrived there to operate on Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. De Bakeaty, a pioneer in the development of an artificial heart, is scheduled to implant an artificial femoral artery in one of Dr. Keldysh's thighs. Dr. De Bakey has performed similar operations in this country.
WASHINGTON—There is only one way the Congress of the United States can end the war in Vietnam—by forcing a surrender of almost all American objectives in Southeast Asia.
The lecture read to the President's Congressional critics by Herbert G. Klein, the White House Director Communications, spells out Mr. Nixon's determination not to brook interference with his conduct of either the war or the peace negotiations. In the process, political facts at home and military realities in Vietnam are to be bent to the President's will. If the truth stands the way, the White House communicators blithely revise it.
Vietnam has become one man's war. Whether it is his crusade to prove that he, personally, cannot be “pushed around,” or that our inevitable eventual departure is “honorable” does not matter. What matters, aside from the supreme consideration of the human losses and suffering caused, is that the President used the period of Congressional adjournment and preoccupation with the holiday season to intensify the war far above any previous level.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8 —In one of his last acts as Defense Secretary, Melvin R. Laird today abolished the naine Egress Recap, given year ago to the plans for handling the return from Indochina of American war prisoners, and retitled it Homecoming.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told the House Armed Services Committee today that “from a military standpoint, the Vietnamization program has been completed.”
PALO ALTO, Calif., Jan. 9 (UPI) — The Palo Alto City Council voted today, 5 to 3, to endorse efforts to collect money to rebuild the Bach Mai Hospital, damaged in recent bombing of Hanoi. The council also directed the city staff to prepare a resolution in support of antiwar demonstrations on Inauguration Day.
American bombing of Hanoi was resumed on the evening of Dec. 18, and the next day it was announced that captured airmen from B‐52 bombers shot down over the city would be seen at a “press conference” at the International Club. The promised occasion proved to be simply an exhibition.
In the last year foreign correspondents have faced growing censorship problems around the world, mostly through arrest or expulsión, the threat of expulsion or the denial of entry visas. They also encountered increasing refusal by officials to provide facts and were hampered by state control or censorship of the local press on which foreign reporters often depend‐for news tips and background information.
PARIS, Jan. 9—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho held the second session today of their current round of private talks on a Vietnam cease‐fire.
To the Editor: It is now a generally accepted conclusion that Secretary of State William Rogers, if you believe the news stories, editorials and columns, is the Secretary in name only. As a somewhat expert observer of the national Government and a long‐time Congressional staff member and Government administrator and educator and because of having known and observed him since he was on the staff of the Truman National Defense Committee and its successor, the Mead Committee, I believe history will reveal him as one of best Secretaries.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jam 10 (AP)—The United States command reported yesterday that heavy B‐52 raids had been flown for a second day against Communist troop concentrations in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam near Kontum.
STOCKHOLM, Jan. 6—Now that the Swedish Government has talked itself into another diplomatic tangle with Washington, the question has been raised anew here why this neutral country expresses more hostility toward the United States' role in Vietnam than any of America's other traditional friends. The Swedes, rather shy in comparison with, say, the outgoing Danes, and living in a country about the size of California with New York City's population, are themselves divided on the answer. Their neutrality has kept them out of wars since the Napoleonic era but their recent words have brought them trouble, particularly with a sensivive. Washington.
CANBERRA, Australia, Jan. 9 —Prime Minister Gough Whitlam took a conciliatory tone toward the United States today, but warned that he would react strongly and publicly against another renewal of the intensive bombing of North Vietnam, a cause of friction between Canberra and Washington.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9—Pentagon officials said today that American pilots were being permitted to cross the 20th parallel in pursuit of North Vietnamese jets that attempt to attack United States B‐52's and other bombers operating south of the 20th parallel.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9—President Nixon quietly observed his 60th birthday today in continued silence and isolation so far as his conduct of the Vietnam War is concerned.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9 —President Nixon's first two new Cabinet nominees to face Senate confirmation proceedings refused today to commit themselves on key Administration policies.
THE HAGUE, the Netherlands, Jan. 9 (Reuters)—A spokesman for the Foreign Ministry today rejected the proposal put forward yesterday by 120 leading citizens that the Dutch Ambassador in the United States be recalled as a protest against the American bombings in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9—The Pentagon has forbidden all Department of Defense employes, civilian and military, to comment on the resumption of the Vietnam peace negotiations.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9—Pentagon officials said today that American pilots were being permitted to cross the 20th Parallel in pursuit of North Vietnamese jets that attempt to attack United States B‐52's and other bombers operating south of the 20th Parallel.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9—President Nixon quietly observed his 60th birthday today in continued silence and isolation so far as his conduct of the Vietnam War is concerned.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9—Even after all the bitter criticism of President Nixon's decision to bomb Hanoi during the Christmas holidays, there is still a fundamental philosophic difference here over both the bombing and the criticism.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 10—When Hoang Duc Nha first proposed to his wife, Tam, her family vehemently opposed the marriage. “He is only a poor engineer working in a Government office, he has no future,” friends recall that her parents said at the time. They suggested a wealthy doctor instead. But she thought better of the tall, boyishly good‐looking Mr. Nha and agreed to the match —she was right.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 10—Representatives of peace groups have announced that they have obtained all the necessary permits for the planned March Against Death and for Peace in Vietnam scheduled for Inauguration Day, Jan. 20.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 10 (AP)—An American soldier, bitten by a dog in his barracks, died early today. He was they first United States serviceman to die of rabies in Vietnam, where the disease exists in epidemic proportions.
PARIS, Jan. 10 —The two American‐owned residences in the Paris area where recent private Vietnam talks have been conducted were selected because members of the United States Embassy liked them and thought them big enough, their owners said today.
PARIS, Jan. 10 — Henry A. Kissinger met for four hours with Le Duc Tho today on Vietnam cease‐fire, and technical experts working on secondary issues held an all‐day session.
No wonder Elliot L. Richardson took refuge in discreet silence when members of Congress, at his Cabinet confirmation hearing, asked substantive questions about his policy views. By now, he knows that policy in this Administration is the absolute preserve of Richard M. Nixon and the janissaries around him in the White House.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 10—Senator Harold E. Hughe raised today the possibility of an attempt to hold up Senate confirmation of President Nix on's new Cabinet nominees “so we can stop the war.”
FRANKFURT, West Germany, Jan. 10 (AP) — Arsonists set a fire early today in Amerika Haus, the. United States Government's cultural center, damage to hooks and furnishings was estimated at more than $30,000. Amerika Haus has been a frequent target of protests against the Vietnam war.
OMAHA, Neb., Jan. 10 —A 30‐year‐old B‐52 pilot and crew commander is facing a possible court‐martial on a charge of refusal to fly a combat mission over North Vietnam, the United States Strategic Air Command headquarters here said today.
ROCHESTER, Jan. 10 (UPI) —The City Council voted yesterday to urge Congress to cut off funds for the war in Indochina if peace is not reached by Jan. 20. The council has a 5‐to‐4 Republican majority.
PARIS, Jan. 10 — Henry A. Kissinger met for four hours with Le Duc Tho today on a Vietnam cease‐fire, and technical experts working on secondary issues held an all‐day session.
Spinach salad was served in the White House Blue Room Tuesday night during the dinner celebrating the 60th birthday of President Nixon, but the absence of iceberg lettuce from the menu did not mean, the White House said, that the Nixons had joined the lettuce boycott. Cindy Shumaker of Mrs. Nixon's press office said spinach was served “for variety's sake.” She added that “They've had iceberg lettuce several times” since the United Farm Workers Union announced the boycott in 1970.
The North Vietnamese Government has consistently charged that American military operations in Vietnam are “war crimes,” and this accusation plays a very important part in the way they describe the war, both to themselves and to others. In 1965 and 1966, when American bombing in North Vietnam began, their Government repeatedly threatened to try captured American airmen as war criminals, under the Nuremberg precedents, but in recent years this intention, if ever seriously entertained, appears to have been abandoned.
The members of the Senate Armed Services Committee should not have been unduly surprised by Elliot Richardson's refusal to reveal his personal views on the recent carpet‐bombing of Hanoi. The nominee for the post of Defense Secretary has already demonstrated his capacity as Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare to serve the President by unflinchingly abandoning opinions of his own. Having silently acquiesced in Mr. Nixon's policies on busing, he is now equally discreet on the matter of bombing, except to say that he approved of strikes against military targets in Hanoi. Adopting the precise idiom that has apparently been codified by Defense Secretary Melvin Laird as the allpurpose reply to all questions, Mr. Richardson said that he would not get into “the negotiation track”—the new official way of saying that to discuss the bombing of Hanoi would hurt the talks in Paris.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 10. (AP)—The Thai Government has agreed to a United States request to keep American troops and aircraft in Thailand after a Vietnam cease‐fire, Premier Thanom Kittikachorn said today.
OMAHA, Neb., Jan. 10 — A 30‐year‐old B‐52 pilot and crew commander is facing a possible court‐martial on a charge of refusal to fly a combat mission over North Vietnam, the United States Strategic Air Command headquarters here said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 11 (AP) — A United States fighter‐bomber was lost over North Vietnam yesterday as American planes flew their heaviest raids over that country's southern panhandle area since bombing was halted above the 20th Parallel on Dec. 30.
PARIS—It may prove historically correct that the Communist Tet offensive of 1968, a military failure, was indeed North Vietnam's first real victory over the United States in the Indochina war, and that the American bombing attack on Hanoi and Haiphong in December, 1972, despite demonstrable Communist losses in striking power, provided them a second major triumph.
The new Nixon Cabinet is up before the Senate these days for confirmation, and more often than not it is a painful sight. For the new boys, reaching for the most prestigious jobs of their lives, face the most searching Questions about what they really believe, and somehow they have to try to be faithful to themselves, to the President who has nominated them and to his policies, which they may or may not approve.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 11—The B‐52 pilot who balked at bombing North Vietnam after his 175th mission said today that he had refused because “the goals do not justify the mass destruction and killing.”
PARIS, Jan, 11—While Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho continued their closed‐door talks a few miles away, both Saigon and the Vietnamese Communist delegations reverted to stiff demands today at the weekly formal peace talks here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 11 — President Nguyen Van Thieu has increased the size of the special mission being sent to Washington to appeal for continued American support.
As peace talks continue in tight secrecy in Paris, public confusion over the Administration's objectives in Indochina has been compounded by the conflicting testimony of Defense Secretary Melvin R. Laird and his designated successor, Elliot L. Richardson.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan 12 (AP)—United States planes kept up heavy raids on the southern panhandle of North Vietnam yesterday while ground action reportedly tapered off in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 11—The B‐52 pilot who balked at bombing North Vietnam after his 175th mission said today that he had refused because “the goals do not justify the mass destruction and killing.”
The long‐continued war, and especially American bombing in North Vietnam, have naturally had a profound impact on the educational system. For some time the big new Polytechnic, and other buildings of the University of Hanoi, have been closed, as well as most of the city's secondary schools. Faculties and students have left the city, but the educational process for North Vietnam's six million students continues in the provinces, under a system described by the minister as “dispersed concentration” — a phrase by which he meant to describe student‐faculty study groups of ten to twenty persons.
The Philadelphia Orchestra will play Tchaikovsky's “1812 Overture” at the Inaugural Concert at Kennedy Center in Washington next Friday evening. And the same evening Leonard Bernstein will conduct Haydn's “Mass in Time of War” in Washington Cathedral, in a program that will have former Senator Eugene J. McCarthy as speaker and Francis B. Sayre, cathedral dean, presiding. The event, called “A Plea for Peace,” is one of many such activities being planned here and in the capital to coincide with the inauguration festivities.
AUSTIN, Tex.—As negotiations resume in Paris, it may be worth looking back at what has apparently transpired in the last several months.
GENEVA, Jan. 11 — The World Council of Churches announced today that it was sending $300,000 in medical supplies to the North Vietnamese Red Cross. The council also provides relief aid to South Vietnam.
To the Editor:
MOSCOW, Jan. 11—Leonid I. Brezhnev, preparing to begin two days of talks on European security and other issues with President Pompidou of France, declared today that “the Vietnam affair is drawing little by little to its conclusion.”
PARIS, Jan. 11—While Henry A. Kissinger and Le Due Tho continued their closed‐door talks a few miles away, both Saigon and the Vietnamese communist delegations reverted to stiff demands today at the weekly formal peace talks here.
WASHINGTON. Jan 11 —William P. Clements Jr., nominated by President Nixon to be Deputy Secretary of Defense, said today he would not rule out the use of nuclear weapons over North Vietnam.
Beginning next month, there are expected to be 35,000 men and one woman working as pilots on major Scheduled United States airlines. The woman will be 33‐year‐old Emily Howell, just hired by Frontier Airlines of Denver, as a second officer to help fly its Boeing 737's. The airline and the Air Line Pilots Association said that would make Miss Howell the only woman pilot working for a scheduled American carrier, exclusive of air taxis, and probably the first woman in American aviation history. There are a few women in such jobs abroad, but American women have had difficulty accumulating the required flight time to qualify as pilots. Most men get the time by flying in the services. Miss Howell put in her air time as a flight instructor air taxi company pilot.
STOCKHOLM, Jan. 11 (UPI) —King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden called today for immediate peace in Vietnam and said that the United States must not resume its “merciless bombing” of Hanoi and Haiphong. Speaking from the throne on the occasion of the opening of Parliament, the 90‐year‐old King said:
MOSCOW, Jan. 12—France joined the Soviet Union today in opposing the American view that the calling of a European security conference should depend at least partly on progress in forthcoming East‐West talks on force reductions in Central Europe.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 13 (AP)—Traditional enemy staging areas northwest of Saigon were heavily bombed yesterday by United States B‐52 bombers.
PARIS, Jan. 12—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc The conferred for six and a half hours today in a suburban villa, and they are to continue their private talks on a Vietnam ceasefire tomorrow morning.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 12 —The Nixon Administration moved quickly today to reaffirm that the United States had rejected the use of nuçlear weapons in the Vietnam war.
PARIS, Jan. 12—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho conferred for six and a half hours today in a suburban villa, and they are to continue their private talks on a Vietnam ceasefire tomorrow morning.
PARIS, Jan. 12 — Premier Golda Meir of Israel arrived here today for a two‐day unofficial gathering of world Socialist leaders that the French Government has pledged it will officially ignore.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 12—The State Department has recommended to President Nixon that Graham A. Martin, the departing Ambassador to Italy, be named Ambassador to South Vietnam to replace Ellsworth Bunker, who plans to retire after almost six years in Saigon, a department official said today.
The prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages in this country was called “The Noble Experiment,” among other things. It did a lot to destroy our respect for policemen, who were expected to enforce laws which were stupid and unpopular. The war in Vietnam might aptly be called “Noble Experiment II, since it is a similarly narrow‐minded adventure in virtue: It has left us with a secret and unjust contempt for our soldiers, especially our airmen. That contempt will become less and less secret as time goes by.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 12—At the end of a morning of drama and high tension, ten women and two men—including a badly wounded Vietnam veteran who wants the war to end now—were selected today to be the jury in the Pentagon papers case.
DA NANG, South Vietnam, Jan. 12 (UPI)—When United States jets accidentally bombed this big allied air base on Monday, the resident American servicemen took it‐in stride.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 13 — A legislator closely associated with President Nguyen Van Thieu said this week that before the latest round of Paris peace talks began North Vietnam had proposed a compromise on the issue of Saigon's sovereignty by a draft article referring to “three state administrations,” as parties to the accord.
Antiwar groups in Manhattan and Brooklyn took advantige of the sunny, relatively K'arm afternoon yesterday to Walk through neighborhoods to protest the continuation of the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13 —President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam, in an interview made public today, said that if ctrrent peace efforts failed, the United States and South Vietnam hould step up the war “in all possible ways,” including an invasion of North Vietnam.
Henry A. Kissinger, arriving in Paris aboard a special Mr Force plane, said: “President Nixon has sent me back to make one more major effort to conclude the negotiations.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13 (AP) —Senator George Y. Aiken declared today that President Nixon faces “an awful lot of trouble” in Congress unless Vietnam peace talks bring a settlement by Inauguration Day, next Saturday, or soon after.
PARIS, Jan. 13—Henry A. Kissinger left Paris tonight to report to President Nixon after six days of what he described as “very extensive and very useful negotiations” with the North Vietnamese envoy, Le Duc Tho.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 14 (AP)—United, States B‐52's bombed sections of an enemy supply cdrridor, stretching more than 150 miles from the North Vietnamese port of Vinh across the demilitarized zone into the northern tip of South Vietnam, American officials reported yesterday.
TOKYO, Jan. 13 (Reuters)—The Japanese Government and Red Cross Society will jointly send about $27,000 worth of medical supplies to North Vietnam, Government officials said today. The cargo will be flown to Hanoi via Pakistan and China tomorrow, they said.
Senator Barry Goldwater, who sounds as if he'd still like to lob one into the men's room of the Kremlin, thinks it would be “nothing short of disaster” for Congress to supplant or reduce the President's war powers with some legislative procedure. And he is “sick and tired,” he said with his usual subtlety, “of hearing demands, especially by the members of a political party whose leaders got us into this war, that President Nixon end the conflict on their terms.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13—A special committee of the Senate is quietly exploring potential methods to legislate an end to the state of national emergency caused by the war—not the war in Vietnam, but the Korean War.
WASHINGTON — The surprising thing about the news out of Paris is that the two sides have been hung up for so long over the insertion of a few words that really make very little difference to the balance of power between North and South Vietnam.
To the Editor: The fundamental soundness of our system of government was demonstrated last week. Congress, angry about the December bombing of North Vietnam, demanded an immediate cease‐fire. Later, Congress extended the President's time to Jan. 20, possibly Jan. 22, with the implied threat that after that date Congress would act to end the war. However, after Congressional leaders met with the President and his advisers, the leaders appreciated the delicacy of President Nixon's negotiations pursuant to a three‐and‐a‐half‐year‐long plan. Congressional leaders still don't like massive bombing; neither does Mr. Nixon. Congress as of now accepts the executive's responsibility and agress:
VINH LONG, South Vietnam—Vu Thi Mai is a former heroin pusher. She and her family used to peddle narcotics to the servicemen at Saigon's Tan Son Nhut air base. An attractive, sleekhaired 18‐year‐old, Mai lived with an American construction worker and has a 10‐month‐old daughter with fair hair and blue eyes.
The House Armed Services subcommittee recently concluded an investigation of the unauthorized American air strikes against North Vietnam last winter with the remarkable finding that these raids “were not only proper but essential.”
To the Editor: The current strike against the Long Island Rail Road emphasizes the growing conviction that it is not in the public interest to pay unemployment insurance benefits to strikers.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 14 —President Nixon sent Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. to Saigon tonight to consult with President Nguyen Van Thieu about the Paris negotiations on a Vietnam cease‐fire.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 14 —President Nixon sent Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. to Saigon tonight to consult With President Nguyen Van Thieu about the Paris negotiations on Vietnam cease‐fire.
PARIS—In the Vietnamese way, his voice remained soft and conversational despite the emotion of his thoughts.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 14 (UPI)—A United States Navy fighter plane flying north of the 20th Parallel over North Vietnam shot down a North Vietnamese MIG‐17 after a dogfight, the United States command said yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 14 (UPI) — Labor Secretary James D. Hodgson told President Nixon today that unemployment among Vietnam war era veterans “in effect no longer constitutes a national problem.” He credited the Administration's campaign to find jobs for the returning servicemen.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15—President Nixon's order for the Christmas carpet‐bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong was perhaps the most imperial military decision in American history, although its purpose was diplomatic. It was not taken during a declared war, or in a domestic emergency such as Lincoln had to deal with, or in general consultation with Congress and the United Nations, as was Harry Truman's decision to defend South Korea, or even with the dubious authorization of the Tonkin Gulf Resolution upon which Lyndon Johnson relied. Mr. Nixon's bombing decision apparently was not discussed even with his own Joint Chiefs of Staff.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 15 (Reuters)—The 18‐year‐old daughter of President Nguyen Van Thieu is to be wed Friday. Newspapers published a two‐column announcement of the approaching marriage of Miss Nguyen Thi Tuan Anh and Nguyen Tan Trieu, son of the director of the national airline, Air Vietnam.
Stock prices registered their fourth largest decline yesterday in more than two years. Traders' fears were attributed to prospects of renewed inflation and uncertainty about President Nixon's Phase 3 economic plans. The Dow‐Jones industrial averaged slumped 13.77 points to close at 1,025.59. Earlier in the day, prices had climbed on Vietnam peace hopes. DeDetails on Page 51.
The credit markets displayed additional fear yesterday that the pace of inflation might accelerate under the Phase 3 economic plans while the markets largely ignored what seemed to be increased prospects for peace in Vietnam.
Stock prices registered their fourth largest decline yesterday in more than two years. Traders' fears were attributed to prospects of renewed inflation and uncertainty about President Nixon's Phase 3 economic plans. The Dow‐Jones industrial av eraged slumped 13.77 points to close at 1,025.59. Earlier in the day, prices had climbed on Vietnam peace hopes. Details on Page 51.
President Nixon's decision to halt all offensive military action against North Vietnam is a promising gesture. It reinforces the cautious optimism voiced by both sides after six days of marathon peace talks in Paris last week between Presidential aide Henry A. Kissinger and North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Due Tho.
President Nixon, citing “progress” made in the cease‐fire negotiations in Paris, suspended bombing, mining, shelling and all other offensive action throughout North Vietnam yesterday. The White House press secretary announced the suspension after several hours of consultations between the President and Henry A. Kissinger. But United States reconnaissance of North Vietnam continues. [Page 1, Column 8.]
To the Editor: The proposed solution of added controls, more review personnel and new agencies of the Congress [editorial Dec. 26] will not cure the problems of our national defense procurement system. It is based on a belief that the problem is rooted in the evils of a military‐industrial “conspiracy,” phony budgetary practices and “bought” contracts.
OTTAWA, Jan. 15—Canada is prepared to begin moving peace‐keeping force of as many as 1,450 military personnel into Vietnam within 10 days of a cease‐fire agreement, officials in the Department of External tffairs say.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 15 —President Nixon, citing “progress” made in the ceasefire negotiations in Paris, suspended bombing, mining, shelling and all other offensive action throughout North Vietnam today.
BONN, Jan. 15 (AP)—Chancellor Willy Brandt and his Social Democratic party appealed today for a swift end to the war in Vietnam and welcomed the halt in United States bombing of North Vietnam.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 15 (UPI) — Following is a transcript of a briefing today by Ronald L. Ziegler, the White House press secretary, in which he announced a halt in all military operations over North Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15 —Senate leaders of both parties today applauded President Nixon”s decision to stop the bombing of all of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 15—Rare is the Vietnamese in Saigon who buys Tin Song, the small pro‐Government afternoon newspaper. But at 4 P.M. every day, when Tin Song rolls off its antiquated presses, all the foreign embassies and news organizations in town rush to get copies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 16 (UPI)—American planes reportedly continued bombing the southern panhandle area of North Vietnam yesterday right up to the time that President Nixon's order halting bombing and shelling went into effect.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 16 —General Alexander M. Haig Jr., President Nixon's special envoy, arrived in Saigon this morning, reportedly to present President Nguyen Van Thieu with copies of a draft of a new Vietnam peace accord.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 15 —President Nixon, citing “progress” made in the ceasefire negotiations in Paris, suspended bombing, mining, shelling and all other offensive action throughout North Vietnam today.
President Nixon, citing “progress” made in the cease‐fire negotiations in Paris, suspended bombing, mining, shelling and all other offensive action throughout North Vietnam yesterday. The White House press secretary announced the suspension after several hours of consultations between the President and Henry A. Kissinger. But United States reconnaissance of North Vietnam continues. [Page 1, Column 8.].
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 15 (UPI)—Two hundred American servicemen left Vietnam for home last week, dropping United States troop strength there to 23,800, the United States command said today.
MADRID, Jan, 16 (Reuters)—Youths stoned windows and threw gasoline bombs at two American automobile showrooms here today in protest against the Vietnam war, police sources said.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 16—In a development evidently related to reports of progress toward a Vietnam cease‐fire, five leaders of the Communist delegation at peace talks here left today for consultations in their headquarters at Samneua.
State Control of Job Safety and Health?
The credit markets continued to reflect yesterday the bullish implications of Vietnam peace and the bearish implications of too much domestic prosperity.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan 16 — While reports persisted abroad that a cease‐fire in Vietnam was imminent, the Nixon Administration refused today to shed any light on that possibility.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 17—In the final hours of the bombing of North Vietnam on Monday, 87 fighter‐bomber strikes and four missions by three‐plane formations of B‐52's were flown against targets south of the 20th Parallel.
SCITUATE, Mass., Jan. 16—A secretary in the Town Hall motioned toward the American flag and the Scituate town flag, trembling in a slight breeze, and said that the mourning period for former President Harry S. Truman may have helped mute a growing controversy here. “People are used to seeing the flags at halfmast since President Truman died,” she said, “and a lot of them didn't pay any attention. But those who have are very upset. They may be against the war and they may be as angry as anybody, but they don't like the idea of lowering the flag. There's something about using the flag that really bothers them.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16—Final plans for an Inauguration Day anti‐war protest march, from the Lincoln Memorial to the Washington Monument grounds, were announced here today by the two sponsoring peace groups.
ALEXANDRIA, Va., Jan. 16 (AP)—Former Brig. Gen. Earl F. Cole and his secretary were convicted in United States District Court today on seven counts of making false statements to cheat the Army.
SYDNEY, Australia, Jan. 16 —Prime Minister Gough Whitlam declared today that he expected to “get along” with President Nixon despite differences between the two leaders on Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 17—President Nguyen Van Thieu is expected to give his approval to the text of a cease‐fire agreement brought to him yesterday by Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., and the Government is now going over the details of how it is to be carried out, according to Vietnamese officials close to the presidential palace.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16—Amid growing discontent on Capitol Hill with what some see as the usurping by the Nixon Administration of the powers of Congress, Representative Ogden R. Reid of Westchester County proposed today the creation of a Congressional budget agency that could compel the executive branch to spend money appropriated by Congress.
C.B.S. News reported yesterday that it had gained access to portions of the draft agreement to end the war in Vietnam and gave details of provisions for release of prisoners, troop withdrawal, composition of a control commission and signing procedures.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 17—President Nguyen Van Thieu is expected to give his approval to the text of a cease‐fire agreement brought to him yesterday by Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., and the Government is now going over the details of how it is to be carried out, according to Vietnamese officials close to the presidential palace.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16 (AP) —Senator Hubert H. Humphrey said today that even after the Vietnam war ends, the sources of growing tension between Congress and the Nixon Administration will remain.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 18—President Nguyen Van Thieu has raised several serious objections to aspects of a proposed Vietnam peace agreement, a well‐informed but unofficial South Vietnamese source said yesterday.
TOKYO, Jan. 17—Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ohira said today that Japan would extend emergency economic aid to Indochina as rapidly as possible after a cease‐fire in the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 18—President Nguyen Van Thieu has raised several serious objections to aspects of a proposed Vietnam peace agreement, a well‐informed but unofficial South Vietnamese source said yesterday.
PARIS, Jan. 17—In a radio interview broadcast today, Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Vietnam said that his Government would refuse to sign an agreement that mentioned the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 18 (AP)—The United States command announced yesterday that American war planes had attacked enemy positions throughout South Vietnam in the highest number of strikes in more than a month.
With a title like "Death of a Jew," you almost don't need a movie. And in Denys de la Patalliere's "Death of a Jew," which opened yesterday at neighborhood theaters, you almost don't have one. What you do have is an incredible story, told in moving pictures, about a tender relationship between an old Arab police inspector (the late Akim Tamiroff) and a young Israeli spy (Assaf Dayan). The newspaper ads quote one critic as saying that the story "can be appreciated by Arabs as well as Israelis." And I am afraid that an ecumenism at just that level of naiveté, is what "Death of a Jew" is all about.Shimon, the Israeli spy, is captured deep inside some unidentified Arab country, and, to make him reveal his contacts he is turned over to the police. When all else fails, even the evil technology of the police chief (Jean Claudio: "It's not a question of courage; it's a question of voltage." Sneer.), the old inspector, Mehdaloun, gets his licks.Mehdaloun hopes to replace Shimon's silence with a gregarious will to live, and thus to talk (so as to stay alive); and to this end he sets about corrupting him with kindness. He plies Shimon with gifts; rooms him in his own apartment; takes him eating, drinking, whoring; and grows so fond of his enemy that he begins calling him "my son."It is all to no avail. Shimon remains tight as a clam. But, irony of ironies, Mehdaloun falls prey to his own scheme! And he is left at the last, entering his dotage, with a new gregarious will to live—not to mention extravagant tastes for room service, vodka straight and compliant Scandinavian blondes.All this is not quite as stupid as it may seem in the abstract. Anyplace but the Middle East (and perhaps North and South Vietnam) it might have furnished a movie plot. A friend, intelligent and much too kind, has suggested analogies all the way from Claude Berri's "The Two of Us" to Bergman's "Persona." Personally, I am put more in mind of certain Shirley Temple movies; but any plot idea that has floated so far must have some buoyancy to sustain it.Assaf Dayan and Akim Tamiroff have been highly engaging actors, but they are both pretty dreadful here. The film is in English, which Tamiroff speaks with a Yiddish accent (somewhat unsettling, under the circumstances), and which all the others speak as if they had learned it at school in France. Denys de la Patalliere, ("Taxi for Tobruk," "Marco the Magnificent") directs as if he hadn't learned anything at all. "Death of a Jew" is the kind of film that seems to advance from scene to scene not by any inner necessity, but rather because everybody at a particular time in a particular place finds himself at a loss for what to do next.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 17—With protests against the Administration's policy in Vietnam planned throughout the weekend — ranging from vigils and religious services to marches and rallies — local and Federal authorities are joining forces to insure that the inauguration and its surrounding ruffles and flourishes are not disrupted.
President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam has raised several serious objections to aspects of a proposed peace settlement, an informed source said yesterday. But Mr. Thieu has reportedly accepted the broad outlines of the draft agreement. His objections apparently center on four issues, including the limitations on movements of military units in South Vietnam and North Vietnam's refusal to recognize that part of the demilitarized zone belongs to South Vietnam. [Page 1, Columns 7–8.]
To the Editor: In default of a decision by the Supreme Court on the “constitutionality” of our participation in the Vietnam war, a number of lawyers have engaged in learned debate over whether the (now‐repealed) Tonkin Gulf Resolution and the various military appropriations statutes have been the functional equivalent of a “declaration” of war authorizing Presidents Johnson and Nixon to carry on America's longest and saddest military campaign.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 17—There were growing indications today that the Laotian Government and the Communist‐led Pathet Lao have resigned themselves to the eventuality of a cease‐fire negotiated without them by their respective backers, which could come soon after a settlement is reached for Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 17 (UPI) — Large numbers of antiwar Congressmen will boycott President Nixon's second inaugural, a California Democrat said today. Some may join protesters in the streets demanding that the United States get out of Vietnam.
A court yesterday recommended dismissal of a lawsuit seeking to declare unlawful and contrary to public policy President Nixon's decision last year to mine harbors in North Vietnam.
Although many signs point to an early cease‐fire Vietnam, reports from Saigon indicate that President Thieu is still dragging his feet on an agreement already extensively revised to try to meet his objections. The United States has paid a heavy price in men, material and moral standing for this delay on Mr. Thieu's behalf.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 18—President Nixon has returned to Washington for the start of his second term, but instead of finding a spirit of rejoicing over this spectacular victory and elation over the impending cease‐fire in Vietnam, he found many of his old supporters in a perplexed and critical mood over his recent conduct.
SAN ANTONIO, Tex., Jan. 18 —The council of this traditionally conservative city, which has a large concentration of military bases, unanimously passed a resolution today to help North Vietnam.
The President and His Inauguration
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 18—The United States and North Vietnam announced jointly today that their chief peace negotiators would meet again in Paris Tuesday to complete the text of an agreement to end the war.
PARIS, Jan. 18—The fouryear‐old Paris peace confer ence on Vietnam was suspended today after its 174th weekly meeting, in anticipation of what participants hope will be the final private negotiating round between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 18—An Army staff officer testified today that one of the documents released through the publication of the Pentagon papers could have helped the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong plan last year's Tet offensive.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 18 —Two of the Saigon Government's strongest supporters in the United States Senate—Barry Goldwater and John C. Stennis—urged the Government today not to create obstacles to a peace agreement between the United States and North Vietnam.
In “The Wonderful Tar‐Baby Story,” Joel Chandler Harris described through his bygone Uncle Remus how Brer Fox laid a trap for his enemy, Brer Rabbit, by creating a contraption of tar and turpentine which resembled a provocative doll.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 18—The United States and North Vietnam announced jointly today that their chief peace negotiators would meet again in Paris Tuesday to complete the text of an agreement to end the war.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 18 (AP)—Following is a White House transcript of a news briefing today at which Ronald L. Ziegler, White House press secretary, announced plans for resuming private Paris peace talks next Tuesday:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 19 (AP) — Heavy United States air raids were flown throtighout South Vietnam for a second day yesterday in stlpport of South Vietnamese troops engaged in the increasing ground fighting.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 19—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. left Saigon yesterday with President Nguyen Van Thieu's agreement to the general principles of a cease‐fire accord but without resolving disagreements on several questions of carrying out the accord, a source close to the negotiations said today.
HONG KONG, Jan. 18—The chill that descended on China's relations with the United States when President Nixon began intensive bombing of the HanoiHaiphong region of North Vietnam has lifted with the appearance of a series of articles in the Peking press acclaiming the warmth of the American welcome for a visiting Chinese scientists' delegation and an acrobatic troupe.
The lessons of the eleven‐day bombing blitz against the Hanoi‐Haiphong area are under intensive study in the Pentagon.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 18—An Army staff officer testified today that one of the documents released through the publication of the Pentagon papers could have helped the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong plan last year's Tet offensive.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 19—Gen. Alexander M, Haig Jr. left Saigon yesterday with President Nguyen Van Thieu's agreement to the general principles of a cease‐fire accord but without resolving disagreements on several questions of carrying out the accord, a source close to the negotiations said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 18 (UPI)—The weekly casualty report issued by the United States command today listed twp Americans as having been killed in action in Indochina, both of them airmen lost over Laos.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 18 —Two of the Saigon Government's strongest supporters in the United. States Senate —Barry Goldwater and John C. Stennis—urged the Government today not to create obstacles to a peace agreement between the United States and North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 —Secretary of Defense Melvir R. Laird called today for the negotiation of an agreement between the Soviet Union, China and the United States to hold down future deliveries ?? weapons to Vietnam.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 19—The Pentagon papers trial, in only the second day of testimony, went right to the heart today of the defense's legal position: that much of the material contained in the top secret papers had long been in the public domain.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19—The United States and North Vietnam agreed today to make public here and in Hanoi a series of photographs and some motion‐picture film taken at the last session of the private negotiations between Henry, A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho in Paris.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 —President Nixon will be sworn into office for a second term tomorrow, emboldened by his sweeping electoral triumph of last November and a Vietnam peace settlement apparently within his grasp.
President Nixon's pre‐inaugural announcement that Henry Kissinger will return to Paris Tuesday “for the purpose of completing the text of an agreement” once more raises hope that the end of the Indochina war—or at least the end of. United States involvement—is imminent.
America is a nation in need of healing. There is deep disagreement as to whether the Vietnam war was necessary and honorable enterprise or a moral catastrophe. But there is no dispute that the psychic wounds which the war has inflicted on this large mighty nation are surpassed in pain and lasting significance only by the wounds which the war has imposed on a small weak nation half the globe away.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 19 (UPI)—Premier Thanom. Kittikachorn said tonight that a cease‐fire could be extended to Laos and Cambodia about 10 days after it goes into effect in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 20—South Vietnamese troops have begun series of offensive thrusts on several fronts, apparently in an attempt to improve their positions before a cease‐fire goes into effect, it was reported yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 20—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. returned to Saigon this morning in a further effort to work out several remaining differences with President Nguyen Van Thieu on putting into effect a draft peace accord.
Acknowledging that they were “tired and battered,” antiwar protesters held pre‐inauglural demonstrations here yesterday at the Holy Family Roman Catholic Church and at several hospitals and nursing homes.
TOKYO, Jan. 19 (UPI)—The Chinese Premier, Chou En‐lai, said last night that a ceasefire would be declared soon in Vietnam, dispatches from Japanese newsmen in Peking reported today.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 (AP)—The Air Force disclosed today that a second pilot has been charged with refusing to fly a combat mission against North Vietnam during the heavy bombing campaign last month.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird called today for the negotiation of an agreement between the Soviet Union, China and the United States to hold down future deliveries of weapons to Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 19 (AP)—President Nguyen Van Thieu's only daughter married the son of wealthy airline executive today in South Vietnam's most lavish social event of recent years.
To the Editor:
THE HAGUE, the Netherlands, Jan. 19 (Reuters)—The Dutch flag on the 1945 war liberation monument outside City Hall will be flown at half mast for 15 minutes a day until hostilities end in Vietnam, The Hague City Council has voted.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 —President Nixon will be sworn into office for a second term tomorrow, emboldened by his sweeping electoral triumph of last November and a Vietnam peace settlement apparently within his grasp.
PARIS, Jan. 19 — United States and North Vietnamese experts working on details of the proposed agreement for a Vietnam cease‐fire met today for four and a half hours, in one of the shortest of their series of almost daily meetings since the beginning of the month.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19—The differing moods of this inaugural eve could be heard in the sound of music tonight, with an official concert featuring the triumpliant, cannon of Tchaikovsky's “1812 Overture” at the John F. Kennedy Center, and the drumrolls of Haydn's, Mass in Time of War at the Washington Cathedral.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 20—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. returned to Saigon this morning in a further effort to work out several remaining differences with President Nguyen Van Thieu on putting into effect a draft peace accord.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20—As official Washington celebrated the rites of inauguration, thousands of dissenters demonstrated with marches, speeches, placards and rallies. They were generally orderly protests marked by minor scuffles and a few arrests.

WASHINGTON, Jan. 20—Richard Milhous Nixon was inaugurated for his second term as President today and appealed to the nation and to its allies to show greater self‐reliance “as we stand on the threshold of a new era of peace.”
WASHINGTON, Sunday, Jan. 21 — President and Mrs. Nixon appeared to be dancing their way through the five inaugural balls here early this morning.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—Young, Western‐educated technocrats here talk with an eager glint in their eyes of an imminent foreign investment boom in South Vietnam. It will lift their country out of the wreckage of war, they say, and thrust it into the Asian marketplace alongside such high‐rollers as Singapore and Taiwan. 
Peace in Vietnam was at hand twelve days before last November's election, and by odd coincidence peace seemed to be at hand again two days before President Nixon's second inauguration. Curiously enough, now as then, a few small details do remain. still to be negotiated, but on this historic weekend let us be no more cynical than experience warrants.
PARIS, Jan. 20—Scattered antiwar, anti‐Nixon demonstrations erupted in the heart of Paris tonight, some of them the most violent seen here in recent years, as other protests were held elsewhere in Europe and Africa.
PEKING, Jan. 20 — A Canadian Member of Parliament visiting Hanoi reported Thursday night that senior North Vietnamese officials said a ceasefire agreement had been reached with the United States.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20—The Rev. Billy Graham, the evangelist, said in an interview here that the war in Vietnam was a “judgment of God on America” and that he had had “grave questions” about it from the very beginning.
OAKLAND, Calif., Jan. 20 (UPI)—A much‐decorated veteran of the Vietnam war who was once a member of the White House security detail was honorably discharged from the army yesterday as a conscientious objector.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—At the beginning of 1972 economists in South Vietnam were brimming with optimism. The war had beer tapering off for three years, inflation had been declining, the piaster seemed to be on a plateau of stability and looked as if the rice crop would be big enough to make the country self‐sufficient again in its staple food.
WASHINGTON — As Richard Nixon stood atop the temporary stands outside the east front of the Capitol, he looked out over a massive audience composed of contributors, Congressmen and other allies. He could neither see nor hear the sullen crowd of demonstrators gathered near Union Station several blocks away to protest the lingering Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20—Now that President Nixon has been sworn in for four more years, and the Vietnam war is about to be sworn out, what are the chances for reconciliation in America, or at least for a period of comparative calm?
Following is the transcript of President Nixon's second inaugural address, as recorded yesterday by The New York Times:
HONG KONG — The contrasts between rich man and poor man seem starker in Asia than anywhere else. While some of its countries were achieving spectacular industrial growth last year, others were gripped by hunger amid a vast rice shortage.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON—The Administration signaled last week that the Vietnam war was about over. Henry Kissinger, the White House announced, would return to Paris this Tuesday “for the purpose of completing the text of an agreement.” Although caution was still the rule, most Washington observers were ready to believe that the long‐sought agreement was finally near.
CORNWALL, N. Y., Jan. 20—Mr. and Mrs. Thomas W. Brohard Jr. have announced the engagement of their daughter, Miss Charlotte Clark Brohard, to Capt. David Lee McGinnis of the National Guard who served with the Army's Green Berets in Vietnam. He is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Glenn F. McGinnis, also of Cornwall.
LONDON, Jan. 20 — Senator George McGovern, the man defeated by President Nixon in last November's elections, spent Inaugural Day visiting museums here, eating lunch with some British reporters and watching ballet at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 21—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. met for half an hour yesterday with President Nguyen Vari Thieu and then left Saigon for South Korea.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20—The litttle peach tree in the salon of the South Vietnamese Embassy here was bright with pink blossoms yesterday and a diplomat murmured, “It is a symbol of the new year, of happiness and joy.”
SAIGON—After months of delay and bitter objection, South Vietnam's President Nguyen Van Thieu came around last week to making a profound and difficult decision: He has, according to his close aides, accepted the text of the cease‐fire accord reached by Hanoi and Washington and now seeks only a few “clarifications” to the protocols that determine how a decade of heavy fighting is to come to an end.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 21 (AP)—Heavy fighting was reported in two regions of South Vietnam yesterday as Government troops battled to Improve positions before a cease‐fire.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 21 (AP)—Jane Fonda and Tom Hayden were married; the weekend in a free‐fornt ceremony that includod the singing of Vietnamese songs and the dancing of Irish jigs, a spokesman announced today.
LONDON, Jan. 21—If history confirms its promise, the most important sentence in President Nixon's second inaugural will have been this one:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 22 (AP)—South Vietnamese forces made two attempts yesterday to recover wounded soldiers held prisoner by the Vietcong 40 miles northwest of Saigon but were attacked both times, senior officials disclosed today. Twenty of the wounded soldiers were recovered, the officials said, but 10 others were killed and 26 were wounded.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 21 —Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. conferred with President Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger today shortly after returning from Saigon, where he sought approval of the agreement being drawn up by the United States and North Vietnam to end the Vietnam war.
To the Editor: The Nixon Administration claims that network television news programs lack diversity in the coverage and opinions they present to the viewing public. Assuming this criticism to be valid, the solution should not be the Administration's proposed censorship of network news programs by local stations, but rather the creation of more balancing news by the Administration. A restoration of frequent Presidential press conferences, more public appearances by the President and his key associates, and continuation of the usual personal presentation of the State of the Union message by the President are steps that could be taken to create news that is certain to receive network coverage.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 21—President Nixon's statement in his inaugural address yesterday that the Vietnam war was looming to an end was his first public comment on the war since his election, and it reinforced expectations here that a settlement was near. Following is an assessment, in quesion‐and‐answer form, of the current situation.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 21—Two military, physicians have charged that some of their medical colleagues have actively participated in dozens of bombing raids over Southeast Asia, in violation of international law, military regulations and the Hippocratic oath.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 22—Citizens cannot use the Freedom of Information Act to gain access to unclassified sections of secret and top secret national security papers, the Supreme Court held today.
“I SHALL not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President,” Lyndon Baines Johnson told a startled nationwide television audience the night of March 31, 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 22 (UPI)—South Vietnamese newspapers are forbidden by Government order to publish the names or the pictures of North Vietnamese leaders.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan, 22—In a gloomy broadcast this evening, the Saigon radio said that the cease‐fire agreement believed to be near completion “will not likely bring us a genuine and lasting peace.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 23 (AP)—North Vietnamese troops have reportedly inflicted heavy losses on South Vietnamese forces in more than a week of fighting about 40 miles northwest of Saigon.
He was larger than life, almost a caricature of the Texas caricature that he could never shake, but he never lost his humanity, because with Lyndon Johnson everything was really personal.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 22 (UPI) —Unemployment among veterans of the Vietnam war era fell substantially in 1972, the Labor Department said today. The rate dropped from 8.1 per cent in December, 1971, to 5.5 per cent last month, which was lower than the rate for male nonveterans of the same age.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 22 (UPI)—American military strength in South Vietnam dropped to its lowest point in more than eight years last week, the United States command said today.
PARIS, Jan. 22 — Henry A. Kissinger arrived here tonight, and it was announced that his talks tomorrow with Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam would be moved to the ceremonial setting of the International Conference Center.
SAN ANTONIO, Tex., Jan 22 (UPI)—The City Council, stung by voter criticism of a resolution passed last week to ask for donations to rebuild Hanoi's bomb‐damaged Bach Mai hospital, voted unanimously today to rescind the resolution.
Cast members of 17 Broadway and Off Broadway shows gave up their pay for last Saturday; Inauguration Day, as a contribution to rebuild Hanoi's bombed‐out Bach Mai Hospital.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 23—South Vietnamese troops throughout the country have been put on full alert and security measures here and in the other major cities are being sharply intensified in anticipation of Communist attacks before the expected signing of a cease‐fire agreement.
STOCKHOLM, Jan. 22—Two Swedish members of an international group invited by North Vietnam to inspect bomb damage said on their return here today that about 20 per cent of Hanoi was destroyed by American B‐52 raids last month.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 22 —Pentagon planners report that United States air power is scheduled to be withdrawn from Southeast Asia very slowly in the initial period following any cease‐fire in the Indochina war.
PARIS, Jan. 22 — Henry A. Kissinger arrived here tonight, and it was announced that his talks tomorrow with Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam would be moved to the ceremonial setting of the International Conference Center.
Henry A. Kissinger arrived in Paris last night and it was announced that his talks today with Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam would be moved to the ceremonial setting of the International Conference Center. There was no official word on how long completion of the cease‐fire agreement would take, but the choice of the center suggested that the two sides considered tomorrow's session important. [Page 1, Column 4.]
SEOUL, South Korea, Wednesday, Jan. 24 (Reuters)—President Park Chung lice announced today that South Korea would immediately start withdrawing its 38,000 soldiers from South Vietnam following the conclusion of a peace agreement there.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23—America is moving out of Vietnam after the longest and most divisive conflict since the War Between the States. But Vietnam is not moving out of America, for the impact of the war there is likely to influence Amercan life for many years to come. Though it is probably too early to distinguish between the temporary and the enduring consequences, one thing is fairly clear: There has been a sharp decline in respect for authority in the United States as a resuit of the war—a decline in respect not only for the civil authority of government but also for the moral authority of the schools, the universities, the press, the church and even the family.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23—In diplomatic practice, the “initialing” of an agreement means that the chief negotiators have concurred on the language of the text.
Whatever triumph and tragedy there will be in the settlement between the contending parties in Vietnam, they belong, ultimately and properly, to President Nixon and to the leaders in Hanoi and Saigon.
The Vietnam agreement announced by President Nixon last night after more than four years of false starts and disappointed hopes could mark a momentous turning point for the United States, for Southeast Asia and for the world. If it does not guarantee peace, this historic pact at least provides the framework and opportunity for a new era of compromise and conciliation in Vietnam and elsewhere. In the President's words, “ending the war is only the first step toward building the peace.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23—President Nixon said tonight that Henry A. Kissinger and North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho, had initialed an agreement in Paris today, “to end the war and bring peace with honor in Vietnam and Southeast Asia.”
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's televised address to the nation last night on the Vietnam war, as recorded by The New York Times:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 24—President Nguyen Van Thieu, joining in announcing the Paris accord on Vietnam, declared today that he considered it only as a ceasefire and not as a guarantee of “a stable, long‐lasting peace.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 23—Just when North Vietnam's offensive began at the end of March, an authoritative Communist official explained to Vietcong officials that “our general offensive is designed to defeat the enemy's Vietnamization plan, force the enemy to acknowledge his deTeat and accept a political settlement on our terms.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23—America is moving out of Vietnam after the longest and most divisive conflict since the War Between the States. But Vietnam is not moving out of America, for the impact of the war there is likely to influence Amercan life for many years to come. Though it is probably too early to distinguish between the temporary and the enduring consequences, one thing is fairly clear: There has been a sharp decline in respect for authority in the United. States as a result of the war—a decline in respect not only for the civil authority of government but also for the moral authority of the schools, the universities, the press, the church and even the family.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 24 (Reuters) — Following, in unofficial translation, are excerpts from President Nguyen Van Thieu's radio speech today on the cease‐fire agreement:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23—Members of Congress, after years of bitter debate over the war in Vietnam, united tonight in voicing relief and gratitude that the conflict appeared to be at an end.
PARIS, Jan. 23—Henry A, Kissinger and Le Duc Tho concluded their long negotiations on a Vietnam cease‐fire today with glowing smiles and hearty handshakes.
The capital markets, aided by a report of diminished inflation during December and by expectations that President Nixon would announce a Vietnam ceasefire, showed signs of stabilizing following the sharp decline that set in with Phase 3.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23—Members of Congress, after years of bitter debate over the war in Vietnam, united tonight in voicing relief and gratitude that the conflict appeared to be at an end.
PARIS, Jan. 23—The dollar moved down early today, depressed by a flow of money into Switzerland yesterday, then rose in the afternoon on rumors that a Vietnam peace agreement had just been signed in Paris.
OTTAWA, Jan. 23—A Canadian member of Parliament, just returned from North Vietnam, said today that officials there had told him that the projected international force that is to monitor a truce would be kept smaller than the United States had originally proposed.
After falling sharply most of the day, prices on the American Stock Exchange recovered somewhat yesterday after the White House reported shortly before 2 P.M. that President Nixon would announce at 10 P.M. developments in the Vietnam War.
United States—45,933 killed and 303,616 wounded (with 153,300 of these requiring hospitalization).
As soon as President Nixon ended his Vietnam peace announcement last night, Larry King, the organist at Trinity Church, went to an octaveand‐a‐half keyboard in the sanctuary and began pealing the 10 bells in the tower of the historic church at Broadway and Wall Street.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 24—President Nguyen Van Thieu, joining in announcing the Paris accord on Vietnam, declared today that he considered it only as a ceasefire and not as a guarantee of “a stable, long, lasting peace.”
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's televised address to the nation last night on the Vietnam war, as recorded by The New York Times:
Following are tributes to former President Lyndon B. Johnson that were expressed yesterday:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 24 (UPI)—An increase in Communist ground attacks throughout South Vietnam was reported early today shortly before it was announced that agreement had been reached on a cease‐fire and that it would go into effect this weekend.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 23—United States intelligence sources report that Hanoi has, moved officials from its Ministries of Health and Educetion into South Vietnam's northernmost province in recent weeks, possibly to establish a Communist capital there for the South.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23—President Nixon said tonight that Henry A. Kissinger and North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho, had initialed, an agreement in Paris today, “to end the war and bring peace with honor in Vietnam and Southeast Asia.”
A 1967 visitor to Lyndon Johnson's ranch in Texas vies told by the then President: “This is the tree I expect to be buried under. And when my grandchildren see this tree I want them to think of me as the man who saved Asia and Vietnam and who did something for the Negroes in this country. Yet I have lost twenty popularity points on Vietnam and ten on the Negro question.”
Vietnam
As soon as President Nixon ended his Vietnam peace announcement last night, Larry King, the organist at Trinity Church, went to an octaveand‐a‐half keyboard in the sanctuary and began pealing the. 10 bells in the tower of the historic church at Broadway and Wall Street.
Departing from his custom of celebrating weekday masses in his private chapel, Cardinal Cooke offered a noontime mass of thanksgiving for peace yesterday before 500 worshipers in St. Patrick's Cathedral and prayed that the impending cease‐fire would bring “lasting peace with justice” in Southeast Asia.
BEALLSVILLE, Ohio, Jan. 24—The wind whips through the wires up on Cemetery Hill here these days, rustling the long dried grass and banging the rope on the new metal flagpole.
WEST POINT, N. Y., Jan. 24 —“History shows that there is a major war every 22 years,” the Army captain said. “Maybe our cadets will escape the next one.”
FORT DIX, N. J., Jan. 24—No one threw his cap into the air or ordered a round for all at the bars of the officers and noncommissioned officers clubs here and at nearby Maguire Air Force Base last night.
In his impressive account yesterday of how agreement was reached on the war in Vietnam, Henry A. Kissinger observed almost parenthetically that “no one in the war has had a monopoly of anguish and ... no one in these debates has had a monopoly of moral insight.” If there was a defensive note in the comment, there need not have been; for Mr. Kissinger, emerging from his long ordeal of negotiation, clearly deserves the respect and admiration of the country.
PARIS, Jan. 24 — Le Duc Tho, North Vietnam's chief representative at the negotiations on a cease‐fire, declared today that the agreement initialed yesterday was “basically the same” as the draft reached in October, before the talks collapsed.
Prices on the American Stock Exchange and in the over‐thecounter market dipped yesterday after opening strong. Profit‐taking seemed to be the reason rather than any reaction to the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—The release of American prisoners of war is to begin by midFebruary under the peace agreement, with all the prisoners returned by the end of March.
An offhand quip by Mr. Kissinger at yesterday's briefing may well turn into the most revealing and provocative of all his remarks about the final phases President Nixon's war policy in Vietnam. Asked whether twelve days of saturation bombing of North Vietnam's cities and countryside late last month provided the final impetus to the agreement, the Presidential adviser wisely declined “to speculate on North Vietnamese motives.” Then he added, “I have too much trouble analyzing our own.”
WASHINGTON, Jan, 24—Because the Saigon and Vietcong authorities do not recognize each other, the signing of the Vietnam stettlement in Paris on Saturday will involve “a somewhat convoluted procedure,” in the words of Henry A. Kissinger.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 24 (Agence France‐Presse)—The news of the cease‐fire accord was heard on the streets of Hanoi this morning, broadcast by the street‐corner loudspeakers that only a few weeks ago warned that American bombers were coming.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—This time there was no dancing in the streets, no honking of horns, no champagne lifted in salutation, no slapping on the back —in short, no jubilation.
PARIS, Jan. 24 — Le Duc Tho, North Vietnam's chief representative at the negotiations on a cease‐fire, declared today that the agreement initialed yesterday was “basically the same” as the draft reached in October, before the talks collapsed.
In statements characterized by expressions of relief and hope for enduring peace, world leaders and governments yesterday welcomed the impending cessation of hostilities in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—Following, as made public by the White House today, are the texts of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement initialed in Paris yesterday by Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, and of the four accompanying protocols detailing means of carrying it out. The accord and three of the protocols have been drafted in two versions. The “four‐party” versions will be signed Saturday morning. Because South Vietnam is unwilling to imply recognition, of the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government, “two‐party” versions mentioning that Government will be signed in the afternoon only by the United States and North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—Henry A. Kissinger said today that the United States had “a firm expectation” that the Vietnam cease‐fire that goes into effect on Saturday would soon extend to both Laos and Cambodia as well.
The nation's financial markets moved sharply lower yesterday following President Nixon's disclosure Tuesday night that a cease‐fire agreement had been initialed. Investors were said to be focusing on the outlook for inflation, tight money and high interest rates under Phase 3—instead of on the approaching cease‐fire. Wall Street had been anticipating an end to the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 25 — President Nguyen Van Thieu's closest adviser said today that the Government was prepared to meet with the National Liberation Front 24 hours after a ceasefire agreement is signed to discuss the political future of South Vietnam.
In Wally's Bar in Maspeth, Queens, where the construction men stop to drink on their way home from work, there is a “Support Our P.O.W.'s” banner pasted on the telephone booth and a bartender who talks of killing during his tour in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24 (AP) —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced tonight suspension of “virtually all per sonnel movements to Vietnam” by the Army, Air Force and Navy.
In Wally's Bar in Maspeth, Queens, where the construction men stop to drink on their way home from work, there is a “Support Our P.O.W.'s” banner pasted on the telephone booth and a bartender who talks of killing during his tour in Vietnam.
The bond market bobbed around within a narrow range yesterday, rising slightly on the announcement of the Vietnam ceasefire and then falling back.
Following, in unofficial translation, are excerpts from President Nguyen Van Thieu's radio speech in Saigon yesterday on the cease‐fire agreement. The excerpts appeared in late editions of The New York Times yesterday and are being reprinted to complete the documentary record of the Vietnam peace agreement.
The Vietnam settlement, which will bring an end to American participation in a war that has racked the United States for nearly a decade and could even conceivably bring peace to Indochina after a quarter‐century of hostilities, is a diplomatic triumph that will be welcomed by the people of America and of every other nation in the civilized world.
PARIS, Jan. 24—The ceasefire documents published tody came three months after untermittent but often extremely tense negotiations and 11 days of intensive bombing after a draft agreement was reached last October.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 24—South Vietnamese greeted President Nguyen Van Thieu's announcement today of a ceasefire agreement with an ambivalent mixture of skepticism; relief and, for many, fear. There were no celebrations, no singing in the streets for the warweary residents of Saigon—only business as usual.
President Johnson died at about the moment the cease‐fire agreement was being initialed in Paris, giving at least a symbolic relation to the two events. And as President Nixon announced the cease‐fire, I could not help remembering—as perhaps some other listeners did—what Faulkner had old Dilsey say of the Compson family: “I seed de first en de last.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 24—The last American soldiers in South Vietnam received the news today that the war was finally ending for them with emotions that ranged from elation and relief to disappointment, anger and resentment.
Following is a transcript of Henry A. Kissinger's news conference in Washington yesterday on the Vietnam cease‐fire accord, as recorded by The New York Times:
Stock prices plunged yesterday in their biggest loss in almost 18 months as assorted economic worries outweighed the agreement to end the Vietnam war.
While members of the business and financial community welcomed the announcement of a Vietnam cease‐fire agreement, most agreed yesterday that it would have no dramatic shortterm effect on industry or the economy.
This is the way the war ends, not with a binge but a whimper; not with exultation but with relief; not with trumpets piercing but with the muted timbre of doubt and hope.
PARIS, Jan. 24 (Reuters) —Following, in unofficial translation from the French, is a transcript of Le Duc Tho's news conference today:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24 —Congressional leaders, including some prominent opponents of the Indochina war, gave President Nixon a standing ovation after a lengthy White House briefing this morning on the negotiated truce in Vietnam.
The nation's financial markets moved sharply lower yesterday following President Nixon's disclosure Tuesday night that a cease‐fire agreement had been initialed. Investors were said to be focusing on the outlook for inflation, tight money and high interest rates under Phase 3—instead of on the approaching cease‐fire. Wall Street had been anticipating an end to the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—Henry A. Kissinger said today that the United States had “a firm expectation” that the Vietnam cease‐fire that goes into effect on Saturday would soon extend to both Laos and Cambodia as well.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—At a news conference on Oct. 26, Henry A. Kissinger told the nation that “peace was at hand” in Vietnam. As a delay developed in reaching a final settlement, his statement was often thrown in the Administration's face by its critics.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—Following are highlights the Vietnam agreement, as set out in the text and in news conference today by Henry A. Kissinger:
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 24—The courtroom atmosphere in the Pentagon papers trial continued today to be as much schoolroom as courtroom, with the Government contending again that disclosure of the papers could have been “of use to a foreign nation.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 25 (AP) —United States and South Vietnamese planes reportedly continued their normal war operations throughout South Vietnam yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—Following are highlights of the Vietnam agreement, as set out in the text and in a news conference today by Henry A. Kissinger:
BALDWIN, L.I., Jan. 24 —The first phone call Mrs. Jane Storms, sister of an Air Force prisoner of war, made last night after she learned her brother may be coming home was to cancel a full‐page advertisement scheduled for tomorrow publicizing the plight of the men being held in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 24 (UPI) — Eleven years and 31 days ago, on a dusty road in the hamlet of Duc Hoa near Saigon, the United States suffered its first Vietnam combat loss.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24 —Congressional leaders, including some prominent opponents of the Indochina war, gave President Nixon a standing ovation after a lengthy White House briefing this morning on the negotiated truce in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24—The political future of South Vietnam, at least in the first 90 days after the signing of the cease fire agreement Saturday, will rest in part on a fragile three‐party National Council of National Reconciliation and Concord whose eventual establishment—if it is established—will symbolize the heavy compromise worked out in the peace settlement.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24 —The detailed cease‐fire accord described today by Henry A. Kissinger provides for a complex series of truce supervisory teams intended to bring an end to major warfare in Indochina.
Right up to the evening before the event, it looked as though the Diamond Ball would observe its 14th birthday in its usual manner, as —elegantly and unfussed as things can be done these days, Then President Nixon announced the Vietnam cease‐fire.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 25—Senior Laotian Government officials said today that they understood there was a secret agreement between North Vietnam and the United States under which Hanoi would withdraw 60,000 of its troops from Laos and a lesser num ber from South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 26—Vietnamese Communist military personnel will be flown to Saigon aboard American helicopters Sunday or Monday to join a cease‐fire commission created by the Vietnam peace accord, a well‐informed American source said yesterday.
SINGAPORE, Jan. 25 — The last shot of the Vietnam war will signal the beginning of new opportunity for the leaders of Asia, aided by the major powers, to come to grips with the basic problems of excessive population and poverty, which are already threatening the breakdown of many of their societies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 26—Vietnamese Communist military personnel will be flown to Saigon aboard American helicopters Sunday or Monday to join a cease‐fire commission created by the Vietnam peace accord, a well‐informed American source said yesterday.
The Paris agreement extricates the United States from the Indochina war and sets a pattern for possible peace between Vietnam's two halves. But, in itself, it insures neither peace nor unification of that country nor does seem to guarantee a certain cease‐fire in neighboring Laos and Cambodia.
Throughout the long years of America's ill‐fated involvement in the war in Indochina, the peace symbol remained a persistent expression of determination and hope. As time went on and the yearning for an end the bloodshed grew in intensity, that symbol's message became emblazoned in the minds and hearts of millions. It formed a nonpartisan bond for many who agreed on little else.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—Well‐placed Administration officials said today that President Nixon would soon send Vice President Agnew to South Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries to demonstrate continued American support in the wake of the signing Saturday of a Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 25 — The peace agreement between North Vietnam and the United States has one provision that stood out as improbable when the Communists broadcast it in October. “Peace and national independence) must be closely linked with the exercise of broad democratic freedoms,” the Hanoi radio said, “including guarantees for the right to private ownership and for freedom of enterprise, as provided for in the said agreement.”
Americans were almost evenly divided in their opinion of the heavy bombing of North Vietnam that preceded the final truce negotiations, according to a nationwide Gallup poll completed just before President Nixon announced on Jan. 15 a suspension of the raids.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—For the United States domestic economy, the Vietnam war is likely to end with neither a boom nor a bust.
TOKYO, Jan. 25 — Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ohira of Japan indicated today that his Government expected to be consulted fully by the United States and other major nations on any international plan for the postwar reconstruction of Indochina.
OTTAWA, Jan. 25—The way was being rapidly cleared today for the first contingent of Canadian truce observers to leave for South Vietnam as soon as the Paris agreement is signed Saturday. Some 150 to 180 officers could be on duty there by Monday.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25 (AP) —The Army rejected yesterday ??n appeal by Capt. Eugene Ko??ouc, exonerated of charges in ??onnection with the slaying of ??ivilians at the Vietnamese ??amlet of My Lai, that he be ??llowed to remain on active ??uty as an officer.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 25—Senior Laotian Government officials said today that they understood there was a secret agreement between North Vietnam and the United States under which Hanoi would withdraw 60,000 of its troops from Laos and a lesser number from South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25 —For the United States the end of seven bloody, costly, frustrating and inconclusive years in Vietnam is not the end of its military commitments abroad. It will continue to have a sizable military presence, with all the risks involved, in many parts of the world.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—The cease‐fire agreement between Hanoi and Washington, which President Nixon has said wil “end the war and bring peace with honor in Vietnam and Southeast Asia,” will be signed in Paris Saturday and go into effect that evening.
It's over. Or at least it is supposed to be tomorrow; completion and announcement of agreement between the United States and North Vietnam did not deter final, senseless acts of combat just before the cease‐fire to take effect.
PARIS, Jan. 25—A high diplomatic source said today that Cambodia would announce a halt in her offensive military operations by Sunday fie said that the step was planned on the strength of American assurances that the United States and North Vietnam had reached an understanding during their Paris talks that the cease‐fire in Vietnam would be extended to Laos and Cambodia as well.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—State Department officials expect North Vietnam to release American prisoners of war in groups of about 100 men, starting about Feb. 10. And the Defense Department has placed on alert an elaborate Medical ‐ airlift operation to start flying them home.
HELSINKI, Finland, Jan. 25 (Reuters) — Finland established diplomatic relations with North Vietnam today, the Foreign Ministry announced. It said ambassadors would be exchanged within three months. Finland has no relations with South Vietnam.
The stock market should have gone up. President Nixon had announced the longawaited cease‐fire in Vietnam and Wednesday was going to be the day of the peace rally, when investors would shake off the apathy of war and don the euphoria of peace.
PARIS, Jan. 25 — Preparations were under way today for the final act in the five long years of Paris peace talks—Saturday's signing of the agreements ending the Vietnam war.
The television networks will provide videotaped and live coverage of the signing of the Vietnam agreements in Paris tomorrow.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 25—Racing against the time when a cease‐fire goes into effect, the United States has swamped the South Vietnamese Air Force with hundreds of warplanes it can neither fly nor maintain.
PARIS, Jan. 25—A high diplomatic source said today that Cambodia would halt her offensive military operations by Sunday on the strength of American assurances that Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho had reached an understanding during their negotiations that the cease‐fire in Vietnam would be extended to Laos and Cambodia as well.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 26—In a surge of Communist ground attacks throughout South Vietnam, a barrage of rockets was fired early today into the Bien Hoa Base near Saigon, killing one American and wounding nine.
When Maj. Gen., Gilbert Hume Woodward was last in charge of overseeing an Asian cease‐fire—the one in Korea—he honed and developed a gift for negotiation and coolness under insult, innuendo and harangue.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26—Maj. Gen. Gilbert H. Woodward, a tough 55‐year‐old veteran of negotiations with the North Korean Communists, has been designated to command the United States delegation to the four‐power joint military commission that will help supervise the coming Vietnam cease‐fire.
To the Editor: You said in an editorial (Jan. 5) that Prime Minister Jack Lynch of the Republic of Ireland would “use his five days in this country to dissuade IrishAmericans from contributing funds ostensibly for relief in Northern Ireland but used to buy guns, and ammunition for the Irish Republican Army Provisions's.” You were quite right. Mr. Lynch has been on television shows here saying exactly that and suggesting that those who wished to help the beleaguered Nationalists of Northern Ireland should do so through the Irish Red Cross. He omitted to say that the Irish Red Cross has no jurisdiction in Northern Ireland and in fact can distribute no relief—and has distributed none—to the Nationalists of Northern Ireland during the of turmoil since 1969.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26—Polish and Canadian diplomats said today they were doubtful that the international commission intended to supervise the cease‐fire in South Vietnam would be able to establish a functioning headquarters within the time specified in the protocols of the peace agreement.
SAIGON, South VietnamFor most of the people of South Vietnam the end of the war—if it is the end of their war—is coming far too late for rejoicing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 27—Communist troops reportedly attacked Tay Ninh city west of Saigon this morning as they stepped up their assaults throughout South Vietnam in preparation for tomorrow's cease‐fire.
FORT MONMOUTH, Jan. 26 —Final touches were being put today on plans at Patterson Army Hospital here to receive and care for freed Army prisoners from Vietnam whose homes and families are in the New Jersey and New York metropolitan area.
Administration officials have confirmed that, so far as they are concerned, there will be no post‐Vietnam “peace dividend” to be used for meeting the needs of the cities and other long‐neglected domestic problems.
LONDON, Jan. 26—Amnesty International expressed fear today for the safety of political prisoners in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan 26—Polish and Canadian diplo mats said today they were doubtful that the international commission intended to super vise the cease‐fire in Spouth Vietnam would be able to establish a functioning head quarters within the time specitied in the protocols of the peace agreement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—For most of the people of South Vietnam the end of the war—if it is the end of their war—is coming far too late for rejoicing.
In a war that has never made much sense at best, it seems uniquely, senseless that soldiers and civilians are being killed in these waning hours between President Nixon's announcement Tuesday of a peace agreement and the, moment this evening when the cease‐fire formally takes effect. For the families of these final victims of the war, the circumstances lend an added poignancy to their grief.
PARIS‐The second Indochina war is ending as it began, in obscurity and contradiction. It is like a Pirandello play, confounding appearance and reality. But as in Pirandello, there is profound theme to be found amid the confusion.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 27—Communist troops reportedly attacked Tay Ninh city west of Saigon this morning as they stepped up their assaults throughout South Vietnam in preparation for tomorrow's cease‐fire.
BURLINGTON, Jan. 26—The Burlington Army Ammunition Plant, which as recently as last October employed 600 people making mortar shells for use in the war in Vietnam, closed its production line today. Only 25 maintenance workers will be retained.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 26 (Agence France Presse)—The North Vietnamese Defense Minister, Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, smiling and happy on the stage of the municipal stadium here, congratulated the population of Hanoi today on its “victory” over the American. B‐52 bombers.
Henry A. Kissinger promised members of Congress yesterday that the Administration would consult them before making any firm commitments to North Vietnam on postwar aid programs. On the eve of the formal signing in Paris of the Vietnam cease‐fire accord, Mr. Kissinger made an unusual trip to the Capitol to brief Senators and Representatives on the agreement's terms. [Page 1, Column 1.]
If it has nothing else — and Mark Robson's "Limbo" hasn't — you might at least expect topicality of a film about the problems facing wives of American servicemen who are either missing in action in Vietnam or prisoners of war. By using something less than the sheerest art, Robson manages to make this story ("torn from today's headlines," we are told) resemble any number of dreadful World War II tearjerkers."Interestingly, however, "Limbo" does demonstrate the impotency of so much of the liberal opposition to the war that is now, apparently, coming to an end.Robson is, I take it, a liberal. He certainly was back in the late ninteen-forties when he directed such films as "Champion" and "Home of The Brave."In that optimistic time, political and social issues were clear cut. War against bigotry was simply an extension of the war against Hitler. It was cosily patriotic. The good, voting liberal had not yet had to wrestle with the unruly, rising consciousnesses of all sorts of impatient groups, with, for example, the new black philosophy that says to hell with integration, we'll do it by ourselves.A lot of liberals lost heart in the nineteen-fifties and sixties. It is not fun being ridiculed by the people you had always wanted to protect. Robson, for reasons of his own, has devoted most of his later career to big-budget nonsense on the order of "Peyton Place," "Von Ryan's Express" and "Valley of The Dolls." Watching "Limbo," you can speculate why.The mind that made it is, I suspect, outraged by the war but seems afraid to say so. It is as split in mood as a lot of other people may be split in their sympathies — feeling sorrow for the American P.O.W. fliers, yet overwhelmed by fury with those who continued to go on bombing missions.The liberals protested but mostly with a politeness born, I think, out of memories of World War II, and even Korea, when wars were declared and the stakes were easy to define. There is a similar liberal sort of politeness in 'Limbo," which is as obvious in its narrative structure and physical look as in anything that anyone says.The screenplay, by Joan Silver and James Bridges, set on an Air Force base in Florida, is about three wives who are three points of view, good, bad and all mixed-up.The good wife (Kathleen Nolan) is middle-aged, Catholic, the mother of four, faithful to her husband and angry about the war.The bad one (Katherine Justice) is rich, beautiful, Southern, an all-out patriot and so spoiled that she refuses to believe the eyewitness report of her husband's death.The confused one is Kate Jackson, married only two weeks before her husband's departure, and now hopelessly in love with a nice, honorable, out-of-work space technician.The situations are real enough, but Robson entombs them in a lot of bogus domestic complications, photographed and acted in a simplistic romantic style that denies any sense of real topicality and urgency. If Vietnam were a war like any other (which it is not), there might be a small point to this approach.Only occasionally does the film seem to be about a special, very confused moment in history, but Robson tends to flub these moments too, as in the sequence in which three American wives visit the North Vietnamese embassy in Paris. He opens the sequence with some nice old chop-chop music that 40 years ago used to identify a stock shot of wicked Shanghai.Robson's heart is in the right place, but his movie is unimaginative, phony and ineffectual. It opened yesterday at the Festival.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 —Henry A. Kissinger promised members of Congress today that the Nixon Administration would consult with them before making any firm commitments to North Vietnam on postwar aid programs.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26—A team of about 75 Air Force transportation specialists is expected to arrive here tomorrow to help speed the airlift of the remaining American troops out of South Vietnam, American officers said today.
HOMESTEAD AIR FORCE, BASE, Fla., Jan. 26 (AP) —President Nixon was greeted today by hundreds of people as he arrived for a weekend stay at Key Biscayne. He told the families of Vietnam war prisoners that he wished he could have brought them home earlier.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26 (UPI)—There will behamburgers and fried chicken instead of goulash and kielbasa for the Hungarian and Polish members of the International Control Commission when they arrive in Vietnam this weekend. And the Indonesians may have to get used to American versions of Asian foods.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Jan. 26—Following is the text of a proclamation by President Nixon calling for a national moment of prayer and thanksgiving, issued today at the Florida White House:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 —Henry A. Kissinger promised members of Congress today that the Nixon Administration would consult with them before making any firm commitments to North Vietnam on postwar aid programs.
An illuminated sign bearing the word “peace” will flash in Times, Square tomorrow evening when the ceasefire in Vietnam takes effect.
BURLINGTON, Jan. 26 —The Burlington Army Ammunition Plant, which as recently as last October employed 600 people making mortar shells for use in the war in Vietnam, closed its production line today. Only 25 maintenance workers will be retained.
ST. JOSEPH, Mo.—The house ?? Penn Street where Charley Stockbauer used to live sits ?? a historic crossroads of America.
PARIS, Jan. 27—The Vietnam cease‐fire agreement was signed here today in eerie silence, without a word or a gesture to express the world's relief that the years of war were officially ending.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Jan. 27 (Reuters) — Secretary General Waldheim offered the help of the United Nations today in the “urgent priority” task of rehabilitation and reconstruction in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON — There was an almost audible sigh of relief on Capitol Hill last week when the declaration of a Vietnam accord wiped out the chief stimulus of the Congressional movement to recapture power from the White House. Yet, curiously enough, by halting combat in Indochina, President Nixon may have increased the prospects of an all‐out battle with Congress.
Following is a chronology of the Vietnam war and its historical antecedents:
At the close of his extraordinary televised press conference explaining the terms of the. Vietnam settlement last week, Henry Kissinger concluded his statement with a fervent expression of hope and determination that could not have failed to move his listeners, regardless of their position during the long, divisive conflict that now finally appears to be ended. It was a sentiment that the President himself would have done well to voice.
Lyndon Baines Johnson, the 36th President of the United States, was in some ways a tragic figure. He had great gifts, aspired to do noble deeds, worked with heroic energy and intensity, accomplished much, and was finally brought low by a cataclysmic error of judgment. His extraordinary life was a drama of classical proportions.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sunday, Jan. 28—Nineteen North Vietnamese officers and one civilian member of the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government arrived here from Hanoi today in transit to Saigon, and the leader of the group said he was optimistic that the peace that went itno effect this morning morning would be durable.
WASHINGTON — C. Jackson Grayson Jr. is that rarest of American birds, the tameduck price regulator.
HANOVER, N.H.—This has been a bad winter for skiing and the beautiful campus of Dartmouth College has been decked out in dirty sludge rather than the white drifts of snow usually associated with the Winter Carnival. So there was not even the call of the slopes to deflect students attention last week from the coming of a ceasefire in Vietnam.
ONE long‐standing pressure point on the economic scene was finally removed last week with the signing of the cease‐fire agreement in the Vietnam war, but others were becoming tighter and more irritating in the business and investment worlds.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 28—The United States has given “official” and private assurances to Saigon that it will intervene immediately if the Communists commit any “blatant” violations of the Vietnam cease‐fire, a wellinformed South Vietnamese official said yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 27 (UPI) — Disgruntled American military policemen complained today that the United States was providing better facilities for the North Vietnamese coming to Saigon than are given to United States soldiers.
MOSCOW, Jan 27 — The Soviet Union's leaders pledged continued support to Vietcong leaders today and expressed confidence that their cause would ultimately triumph in South Vietnam.
LONDON, Jan. 27 (AP)—Former Prime Minister Harold Wilson denied today a report that he hid an American spy in his residence outside London where he met with Soviet Premier Alexei N. Kosygin in 1967 for secret talks on Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 — It rained quietly and steadily in Washington the day the guns stopped in Vietnam. From the Lee Mansion and the Kennedy grave on the Virginia slope, across the Potomac to the Congressional building on Capitol Hill, everything was blurred and quiet.
WASHINGTON—The war in Vietnam produced what is widely recognized as the greatest blunder in Government economic policy since World War II — a blunder whose effects have still not been entirely eliminated.
President Nixon, like millions of other Americans, watched the signing of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement on television yesterday and then, like many others, took part in modest and somber celebration of the end of a tragic war.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 The—United States formally proposed today that the 12‐nation conference on guaranteeing the peace in Vietnam be convened on Feb. 26.
“Good evening. I have asked for this radio and television time tonight for the purpose of announcing that we have today concluded an agreement to end the war....” With these words of President Nixon last Tuesday, the images of a tragic decade began to recede into history: The proliferating tombstones at Arlington National Cemetery ... the tangled bodies of the Mylal massacre ... the horror of a young woman over the death of a fellow student at Kent State University ... the terror of a naked, napalmed Vietnam child ... the ravaged remains of Quangtri City ... and the face of a President whose ambitions, for nation and self, were frustrated by a war he sought to end by escalation. Last Monday, scant hours before Mr. Nixon's announcement, Lyndon Baines Johnson died in San Antonio.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 27 (Reuters) — South Vietnam today adjusted the exchange rate for its currency, changing the price for one United States dollar from 465 to 475 piasters.
CAMBODIA —The exiled Cambodian head of state said in Peking that his guerrilla forces would fight on despite the cease‐fire in Vietnam. Cambodia announced a suspension of offensive activities tomorrow. [Page 26.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 28—A cease‐fire officially went into effect throughout Vietnam at 8 A.M. today, but widespread fighting continued and there were reports that an unarmed American helicopter sent to pick up a Vietcong delegation and bring it to Saigon had been shot down over Tay Nin Ninh Province.
PEKING, Jan. 27 (Reuters)—The exiled Cambodian head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, said today that his guerrilla forces would fight on despite the cease‐fire in Vietnam.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 27—Gen. Phoune Sipraseuth, head of the Pathet Lao negotiating team in the Laos peace talks, returned here today from consultations in Samneua and Hanoi. Despite the cease‐fire in Vietnam, he gave no indication that peace in Laos could now be concluded quickly.
SYDNEY — Since forging a Pacific partnership in World War II, the United States, Australia and New Zealand have followed largely similar policies in Asia. Australian and New Zealand troops served in Korea. And, while most other American allies balked, the Anzacs joined the Americans in Vietnam.
ROME, Jan. 27 (UPI)—Pope Paul VI has instructed Italian bishops to set aside Sunday, Feb. 4, in all the country's churches as a day of prayer and special collections for the reconstruction of Vietnam, the Vatican announced today.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27—The State Department tonight released the list of American civilians acknowledged by North Vietnam as having been captured in South Vietnam during the Vietnam war. The list left about half the 51 American civilians believed missing or captured unaccounted for.
After all the death and destruction, the settlement finally written simply codified the military stalemate of the long war. The United States agreed to depart without a guarantee of the survival of an independent, anti‐Communist South Vietnam. North Vietnam agreed to stop fighting without a guarantee of a Communist‐dominated coalition government in Saigon. Both sides agreed to leave the South's future to a political contest among Vietnamese.
TOKYO, Jan. 27—Premier Kakuei Tanaka tentatively proposed today that a conference of Asian and Pacific nations be convened to secure the postVietnam peace of Asia.
Military
WARSAW, Jan. 27—A contingent of 75 Polish military officers and civilians left here tonight to join Hungarian, Canadian and Indonesian units in supervising the Vietnam ceasefire.
From a cold business point of view, World War II was a blessing for the United States: It lifted a depressed economy up to full employment and made this country not only the arsenal of democracy but its financial, capital as well. By contrast, the Vietnam war was an unmitigated drain. Since the economy was already close to full employment in 1965 when President Johnson began his major escalation, the war put an extra strain on national resources and kicked off an inflation that has been difficult to root out.
At 7:30 Saturday, evening a Casualty Assistance Calls Officer from the Department of Defense phoned the home of Mrs. Loyal Goodermote to tell her that the name of her son, Wayne K. Goodermote, a Navy lieutenant, was included in the list of prisoners of war issued by North Vietnam.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Jan. 28—President Lon Nol made an attempt today to bring about peace in Cambodia on the basis of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
Jo Anne Flora has been waiting for six years. Her husband, Sgt. 1st Cl. Carroll E. Flora Jr., was listed as missing after he fell from a medical evacuation helicopter near the Demilitarized Zone and disappeared.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28—The Communist side has notified the United States that it holds 555 American military prisoners in North and South Vietnam who will be released within the next two months.
HONG KONG, Monday, Jan. 29—China has expressed the hope that all signatories to the Vietnam peace agreement will “earnestly carry out” its terms.
TRANG BANG, South Vietnam, Jan. 28—At exactly 8 A.M. today the American Armed Forces Radio began reading President Nixon's proclamation of thanksgiving for “the end of the war in Vietnam” and the “beginning of a new era of world peace.”

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 29—Two Soviet airliners flew into Tan Son Nhut Air Base yesterday afternoon carrying Hungarian and Polish soldiers and political officers who will represent their countries on the international commission to supervise the cease‐fire.
NEW BEDFORD, Mass., Jan. 28 (UPI)—The homecoming of Lieut. Comdr. Frederick R. Purrington of the Navy, a prisoner of war in North Vietnam for seven years, will be a hollow one. His father and mother have both died and he does not know it.
DETROIT, Jan. 28—Lieut. Col. William B. Nolde, 43, of Mount Pleasant, Mich., was identified by the Pentagon today as the last American to die in the Vietnam war.
This is the last of three articles on the United States willed forces in the aftermath of the Vietnam war.
Negotiations are a means to an end. Serious problems can arise when nations spend so much of their creative energies on getting talks started that they grow inarticulate about how the talks should end, about the desired outcome. This is a looming danger in the twelve‐nation Vietnam peace conference which the United States is moving to get under way Feb. 26. seems already to be the fate of the long‐awaited EastWest talks to reduce military forces deployed in Central Europe.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 —About 100 American planes, including B‐52 bombers, attacked suspected Communist positions and supply lines in Laos after the Vietnam cease‐fire went into effect, Administration officials said today.
QUANG TRI, South Vietnam, Jan. 28—The artillery stopped firing at this greatest of all South Vietnamese battlegrounds at 8:05 this morning, five minutes late.
TRUCE OBSERVERS — An advance party of North Vietnamese and Vietcong representatives arrived in Saigon but refused to leave the aircraft in protest against a requirement that they fill out South Vietnamese landing cards. Hungarian and Polish soldiers and political officers also arrived. [Page 13.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 29 — The South Vietnamese Government said today that the Communists committed hundreds of ceasefire violations during the first 22 hours of the formal truce but indicated that almost all of them were minor.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 29—After a war of nerves that lasted almost 24 hours, the South Vietnamese Government this afternoon agreed to allow a group of vietcong military representatives to leave a plane at Tan Son Nhut airport without filling out immigration forms.
COMMUNIST TEAMS—An advance party of North Vietnamese and Vietcong representatives arrived in Saigon but refused to leave the aircraft until South Vietnamese dropped a requirement that they fill out landing cards. Two American planes flew to Hanoi to pick up about 150 military men who will help supervise the truce. [Page 13.]
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 —About 100 American planes, including B‐52 bombers, attacked suspected Communist positions and supply lines in Laos after the Vietnam cease‐fire went into effect, Administration officials said today.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 28 (Agence FrancePresse)—Hundreds of thousands of people thronged the streets of Hanoi shortly after dawn today to hear the Vietnam radio announce over its public address system that hostilities had officially come to an end.
WASHINGTON, Jan, 28—During the October news conference in which he proclaimed that “peace is at hand,” Henry A, Kissinger noted that none of the issues involved in the negotiations were simple.
MOSCOW, Jan. 28 (Reuters) —The Soviet Union rushed some of its weapons, including antiaircraft missiles and fighter planes to North Vietnam to counter the last major United States bombing campaign there, Pravda, the Communist party newspaper, said today.
TRANG BANG, South Vietnam, Jan. 28—At exactly 8 A.M. today the American Armed Forces Radio began reading President Nixon's proclamation of thanksgiving for “the end of the war in Vietnam” and the “beginning of a new era of world peace.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 28—The agreement that Secretary of State William P. Rogers signed yesterday in Paris bears a remarkable resemblance in its basic provisions to the Geneva accords of 1954.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 29 — The South Vietnamese Government said today that the Communists committed hundreds of ceasefire violations during the first 22 hours of the formal truce but indicated that almost all of them were minor.
PARIS—In thinking about the ceasefire in Vietnam, Americans quite naturally wonder whether the enforcement apparatus will be swift and effective enough to stop Communist violations. But it is important to recognize that the other side has its own interest in enforcement of the Paris agreement.
ANDREWS AIR FORCE BASE, Md., Jan. 28 (AP)—Vice President Agnew departed today for Saigon on a seven‐nation Asian tour just 15 hours after the start of the Vietnam cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 28—President Nguyen Van Thieu has written a letter to President Nixon expressing his “heartfelt gratitude for the great sacrifices that the United States has made throughout so many years to help us defend our freedom ana our right of selfdetermination.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28—When Lyndon Johnson live and the war in Vietnam cotinued, national Democrat raced each other to escape the long shadow that their last President had cast on the party Already, however, many Democrats see his reputation being redeemed and his influence restored in death—even to the point, some say, that by the time the next President is nominated, Mr. Johnson could be the supreme model for Democratic candidates.
It's been five Christmases, three family deaths, two marriages, two nieces and one nephew since Army Sgt. James Alexander Daly, taken prisoner in South Vietnam in January, 1968, has seen his family and their three‐story home on block of neat brownstones in the Bedford‐Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
WESTBURY, L.I., Jan. 29—Carol Baker, wife of Air Force Capt. David E. Baker, remembers the exact minute the telephone call came. “It was five minutes to midnight Saturday night,” she said.
McGUIRE AIR FORCE BASE, N. J. Jan. 29— The largest military air command departure and arrival point on the East Coast stood poised today to play a role in the return of military prisoners of war from Vietnam.
ALBANY, Jan. 29 — The Democratic minority in the State Senate announced today that they would submit a package of bills designed to correct “gross inequities” resulting from the recent Social Security increase, which, they said, would endanger the Medicaid and welfare eligibility of thousands of elderly people.
CAM LONG, South Vietnam, Jan. 29— South Vietnamese forces were openly ignoring the cease‐fire agreement in the area northwest of Saigon today, but on a relatively small scale and selectively.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Jan. 29—Zambia asked the Security Council today to condemn Rhodesia, charging that the whiteruled African nation had carried out aggressive acts, economic blackmail and military threats that could create a new “Vietnam situation” in southern Africa.
WASHINGTON—On the C.B.S. Evening News, Monday, Jan. 8, 1973, Dan Rather announced to the twenty million faithful followers of the Cronkite show that the reported rift between the President and Henry Kissinger was “past the rumor stage to the fact stage.” He thereby elevated to gospel that which had been for weeks the speculation of Washington commentators and columnists.
LONDON, Jan. 29—The Britsh Government believes that ??he problem of maintaining the ??eace in Vietnam should even??ually be turned over to the United Nations.
PARIS, Jan. 29 — Plans are advancing to nail down the Vietnam accords with international guarantees, even though, at least at the outset, the ceasefire may be proving “fragile,” to use President Nixon's word.
SOLDIER. By Lieut. Col. Anthony B. Herbert, retired. With James T. Wooten. 495 pages. Illustrated. Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $10.95.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29 —Like the Vietnam war itself, the issue of amnesty for those who refused to fight seems likely to be a divisive and emotional part of the American political scene for many years.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 30—The South Vietnamese Government and the Communists accused each other of scores of additional ceasefire violations yesterday, but American analysts described the fighting that continued around the country as “scattered light activity” that was gradually diminishing in intensity.
AUSTIN, Tex., Jane 29 (AP) —Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson said today that her husband knew a cease‐fire agreement had been reached before his death last Monday. She said he had been told personally by President Nixon.
The credit markets, in a reaction that apparently had little connection with either the cease‐fire in Vietnam or with President Nixon's budget message, continued in a slump yesterday. Tax‐exempt bond yields rose particularly sharply. Sereral major new bond issues that had been brought to market last week were permitted to trade without any, support from under. writers yesterday, and prices sank. These setbacks set the stage for today's sales of triple‐A Texas Power & Light Company bonds in the corporate bond sector and of triple‐A Illinois and California issues in the taxexempt area.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 29 (AP)—A United States helicopter pilot, wounded while flying an aircraft reported to bear marks of neutrality, died today. He was the first American killed in Vietnam since the cease‐fire went into effect.
MUONG KASSY, Laos, Jan. 29—While the war in Vietnam may be sputtering to a ceasefire, the war in Laos continues.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 30—The South Vietnamese Government and the Communists accused each other of scores of additional ceasefire violations yesterday, but American analysts described the fighting that continued around the country as “scattered light activity” that was gradually diminishing in intensity.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 30 — The military commission that is to help monitor the Vietnam cease‐fire held its first meeting yesterday, but it immediately became bogged down in a procedural dispute as the Vietcong delegates refused to present their credentials, well‐informed sources said.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29 —Henry Cabot Lodge, the former United States Ambassador in Saigon and onetime chief delegate to the Paris peace talks, says he doubted the possibility of a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war.
OTTAWA, Jan. 29 (Canadian Press—The Canadian Government has demanded the immediate release by Hanoi of a Canadian farm expert held captive in North Vietnam since 1968, the department of External Affairs said today.
A majority of Americans agree with President Nixon that the United States is achieving “peace with honor” in Vietnam, according to a special nationwide Gallup poll conducted last Thursday — two days after Mr. Nixon's announcement of a settlement.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29—The Department of Defense expects to spend $79‐billion next year, an increase of $4.2‐billion over the current year's total, despite the cease‐fire in Vietnam.
The South Vietnamese Government and the Communists accused each other of scores of cease‐fire violations yesterday, but American analysts described the fighting that continued around the country as “scattered light activity” whose intensity was gradually diminishing. “The fighting is definitely on a downward trend,” a high‐ranking American official said, “more noticeably in some areas than in others. There are no major units fighting. Nothing decisive is happening.” [Page 1, Column 1.]
MIAMI, Jan. 29 — The White House said today that it was not surprised that fighting was continuing in South Vietnam and expressed optimism that the cease‐fire would be scrupulously adhered to.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 29—The new four‐nation international control commission held its first meeting this morning and discovered that for the time being the organization was paralyzed.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29 — Went downtown the night the war ended wearing a peppermint‐striped, icecream‐cone‐shaped party hat and carrying a genuine Klaxon noisemaker and looking for pretty girls to hug and kiss in deliriums of joyous celebration, as the fancier newspapers used to say in the better old days.
CAM LONG, South Vietnam, Jan. 29 — South Vietnamese forces were openly ignoring the cease‐fire agreement in the area northwest of Saigon today, but on a relatively small scale and selectively.
TRUNG LAP, South Vietnam, Jan. 18 — Life in this village has been like a nightmare for its people during the war, They do not seem likely to fare much better after a cease‐fire.
The Vietnam tragedy pursues its course. Casualty rolls, American and Vietnamese, cannot yet be closed after all. Political machinery for cease‐fire supervision, so intri cately elaborated in advance, seems clogged with feuds over credentials, landing permits and protocol. The gov ernments say cease‐fire but the fighting sputters on. 
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Jan. 30—For the re turning prisoners of war, the first glimpse of North Amer ica will be the headlands connected by the bridge across the Golden Gate, with the lights and towers of San Francisco behind. 
In the wake of the Vietnam war— at least its international phase—and in advance of the second SALT agreement and Mutual and Balanced Force Reduc tions, it is interesting if not heartening to examine previous efforts to limit the means by which men kill each other. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 30 (Agence France‐Presse) — Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the exiled Cambodion head of state, flew in here today from Peking for a week‐long visit. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 31—The level of fighting in Vietnam dropped substantially yesterday and to day and American analysts said the post‐cease‐fire combat was “slowly dying out.” 
HAVANA, Jan. 30 (Reuters) — Cuban students last night burned a huge effigy of Presi dent Nixon at the end of a day of celebration marking the Viet nam cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 — A marine private who was be lieved to have been killed in the battle of Khe Sanh in 1968 and buried in a military cemetery in St. Louis has turned up alive as a prisoner of war held by the Vietcong in South Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 31—Efforts to begin supervising the Viet nam cease‐fire remained blocked yesterday as the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission con tinued to be embroiled in a dis pute over how to hold its first formal session.
BRENTWOOD, L. I., Jan. 30 —A Long Island Marine sched uled to be returned from a North Vietnamese prison camp to face possible charges of de sertion will be treated—at least for the time being—the same as any other repatriated P.O.W. 
SUWON, South Korea, Jan. 30 — The first contingent of South Korean troops with drawn from Vietnam after the cease‐fire returned home today to a heroes’ welcome. 
MOSCOW, Jan. 30 — Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Com munist leader, today hailed the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement as an important turning point in international affairs that not only would have a positive ef fect on Soviet‐American rela tions but also could influence settlements in world trouble spots such as the Middle East.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 30—What did more than a decade of war accomplish for South Vietnam? 
To the Editor: Last November the Mayor's Com mittee on Executive and Judicial Com pensation, composed of six distin guished business executives and pro fessional men, recommended what it termed a “modest” increase of $2,500 in the salaries of the 257 judges of the New York City Civil, Criminal and Family Courts—an increase well with in the then existing Federal Pay Board limits. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 — A marine private who was be lieved to have been killed in the battle of Khe Sanh in 1968 and buried in a military cemetery in St. Louis has turned up alive as a prisoner of war held by the Vietcong in South Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 31—The level of fighting in Vietnam dropped substantially yesterday and to day and American analysts said that post‐cease‐fire combat was “slowly dying out.” 
MOSCOW, Jan. 30 — Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Com munist leader, today hailed the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement as an important turning point in international affairs that not only would have a positive ef fect on Soviet‐American rela tions but also could influence, settlements in world trouble spots such as the Middle East. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30— Nixon Administration officials believe that a more rapid de velopment of relations with China may turn out to be one of the major “dividends” for Washington from last week's Vietnam settlement. 
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philip pines, Jan. 30—Returning Amer ican civilian prisoners of war will be given the same medical examinations and treatment that returning soldiers receive, but they will be ejected from the program if they make pub lic statements, a State Depart ment spokesman said here to day. 
The eagerness with which Americans anticipate the release of 555 prisoners of war in the wake of the Vietnam cease‐fire makes it easier to understand the growing impatience in Pakistan over the continued detention of some 90,000 Pakistani war prisoners in India more than a year after the conclusion of hostilities on the Indian subcontinent. 
Following, as distrubuted in English by Tass, the official Soviet press agency, are ex cerpts from a speech deliv ered yesterday by Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communist party chief, at a dinner in honor of the North Viet namese negotiators in Paris: 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 30 (Agence France‐Presse) — James Callaghan, former Brit ish Home Secretary and Chan cellor of the Exchequer, is to visit Hanoi next month, an in formed Western source here said today. 
PRINCETON, N. J.—Perhaps for the very first time after any major war the factual and technical groundwork for an immediate start on the task of reconstruction and development has already been prepared in advance of the end of a war. In published form, the study is known as “The Postwar Development of the Republic of Viet nam.” (1970) 
SAIGON, South Vietnanm, Wednesday, Jan. 31 — Vice President Agnew arrived in Saigon yesterday for discus sions with President Nguyen Van Thieu on postwar relations between the United States and South Vietnam. 
SANTA CLARA, Calif., Jan. 31—For Bernice Smith, the waiting continues.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—President Nixon announced today that he would send Henry A. Kissinger to Hanoi on Feb. 10 for three days in an effort to make the peace in Vietnam more secure and lay the groundwork for reconstruction of Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31 (AP)—The Postal Service announced today that it would refuse as of March 1 all personal letters mailed to military personnel in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON. Jan. 31—It has been a time of unusual diplomatic activity, not only in conjunction with the Vietnam cease‐fire but also on problems involving many European countries. What follows is a summary of, the major negotiations currently involving the United States.
To the Editor:
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Jan. 31—He will come from a quiet, slowmotion world. There, in the endless hours, days; years, sounds were probably events and changes in temperature and humidity were experiences. There, food, clothing and shelter were basic, drab and bare. Language was simple.
Each prisoner of war returning from Indochina will receive a gold‐plated lifetime pass good for any professional baseball game, Bowie Kuhn, the commissioner of baseball, announced yesterday.
MOSCOW, Jan. 31 (AP) —North Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Duy Trinn, conferred today with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko, on the cease‐fire situation in South Vietnam and then left for home, Tass reiported.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 31 (Agence France‐Presse)—Fire crackers sputtered in the streets of Hanoi far into last night as the nation prepared for its first peacetime Tet, or Lunar New Year, in years.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—Richard Nixon, who has been running for office for 26 years with — as he said — “mixed results,” offered some advice today to candidates for the Presidency in 1976: Don't be too eager.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—President Nixon reiterated today his opposition to amnesty for those who refused to serve in the military in the Vietnam war. Instead, he stressed the need for criminal penalties and said, “We cannot provide forgiveness for them.”
HONOLULU, Jan. 31 (UPI)—The commander of United States forces in the Pacific announced that two F‐4 jet fighters crashed in the. Gulf of Tonkin off Vietnam today during a routine patrol mission.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31 —When John T. Downey was a Yale senior in 1951, a classmate later recalled, a Central Intelligence Agency recruiter visited the campus.
SIEMREAB, Cambodia, Jan. 31—A tough North Vietnamese regiment in control of the vast stone temples, palaces and pavilions of the ancient city of Angkor shows no signs of making peace, yet it is clearly having trouble keeping its Cambodian collaborators in the same frame of mind.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Thursday, Feb. 1—The two commissions that are to monifor the Vietnam cease‐fire had their first official contact yesterday, but there was still no indication when either might actually begin its work in the countryside.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31 — Mr. Richardson, who took office yesterday, said at a news conference that he did not want to hold out the prospect of “massive” reductions. But he did say that the cessation of American combat activities in Vietnam should make some savings possible.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Feb. 1—Fighting continued to sputter and flare in South Vietnam yesterday as the cease‐fire went into its fifth day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Feb. 1—Fighting continued to sputter and flare in South Vietnam yesterday as the cease‐fire went into its fifth day.
Over the last five years and nine months—the time that has passed since her only son, Lieut. Comdr. Read B. Mecleary, was shot down in North Vietnam and captured — Mrs. Peyton Mecleary has come to treasure each small contact she has had with him and with people who knew him and with those who have reached out to her in kindness and support.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 31 — The South Vietnamese armed forces and police have sharply restricted the movement of foreign newsmen since the cease‐fire went into effect on Sunday and have threatened some of them at gunpoint.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31 (AP) — Civilian prisoners of war will not be penalized with loss of military medical treatment if they talk to newsmen after their release by the Communists, the State Department said today.
MOSCOW—The agreement on ending the war which opens the way to restoration of peace in Vietnam and the whole of Indochina has been received in the Soviet Union, as in the world, with great satisfaction.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—Following is the White House transcript of President Nixon's news confernee at the White House today:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3I—U. Alexis Johnson, President Nixon's nominee to replace Gerard C. Smith as the chief American negotiator at the talks with the Soviet Union on limitation of strategic arms, said today that he believed the results of the bombing of Hanoi last month were “good” because they helped “in bringing about an agreement” to end the war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 31 (UPI)—The last seven men of the United States Coast Guard contingent in Vietnam have gone home, the United States command said today, leaving American strength at about 21,000.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 31—The Vietnamese are a remarkable and stoical people.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—President Nixon announced today that he would send Henry A. Kissinger to Hanoi on Feb. 10 for three days in an effort to make the peace in Vietnam more secure and lay the groundwork for reconstruction of Southeast Asia.
GOLDSBORO, N. C., Jan. 31 (AP) — When Capt. John H. Alpers Jr. and Capt. Brian M. Ratzlaff of the Air Force are released from North Vietnamese prisoner‐of‐war camps, they will learn they became fathers four days after a cease‐fire went into effect.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 —North Vietnam turned over to the United States in Paris today the names of nine American prisoners — seven servicemen and two civilians—held by Communist forces in Laos. The list also included the name of a Canadian civilian.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 —A lot of people around here have been wondering about President Nixon's mood as he goes into his second term, and now we have a few hints from the President himself. The man is fighting mad. He has his second term and his settlement in Vietnam, and he has come out of his struggles with all his grievances intact. If anything, he is more combative and energetic than ever before, and he seems determined to reform everything and everybody but himself.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 1—Vice President Agnew, paying a five‐hour visit, assured Cambodia today of continued U. S. support.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 1— South Vietnamese military officials informed journalists today that their press credentials were no longer valid for entry to Tan Son Nhat air base.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 2—The chief of the Vietcong delegation to the joint military commission, who is the second highest‐ranking member of the Communist apparatus in South Vietnam, arrived In Saigon yesterday aboard a United States Army helicopter after being picked up in a Communist‐held town near the Cambodian border.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 —Henry A. Kissinger said tonight that during his mission to Hanoi next week he would explore ways of moving relations between the United States and North Vietnam “from hostility toward normalization.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 2—With the Vietnam cease‐fire in its sixth day, American analysts today reported “a marked decrease” in fighting and said that the situation was approaching “a fairly manageable level.”
PEKING, Feb. 1 — Premier Chou En‐lai last night hailed the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement as a great victory for China's Vietnamese allies, and called upon Washington and Saigon to refrain from any acts of “procrastination, expansion and sabotage” that could undermine it.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 2—The chief of the Vietcong delegation to the joint military commission, Lieut. Gen. Tran Van Tra, arrived in Saigon yesterday aboard a United States Army helicopter after being picked up in a Communist‐held town near the Cambodian border.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 2—With the Vietnam cease‐fire in its sixth day, American analysts today reported “a marked decrease” in fighting and said that the situation was approaching “a fairly manageable level.”
After an extraordinary lineup of news specials last night—interviews with Henry A. Kissinger, the late Lyndon B. Johnson and South Vietnam's President Thieu—the Columbia Broadcasting System is tonight turning over its three hours of prime time, from 8 to 11, to Shakespeare's “Much Ado About Nothing.”
LONDON, Feb. 1 — Victor Louis, the Soviet citizen who is Moscow's correspondent of The London Evening News, said in a dispatch today that American prisoners of war captured in Vietnam “have been held in secret maximum security camps in China.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 —North Vietnam turned over to the United States in Paris today the names of nine American prisoners — seven servicemen and two civilians—held by Communist forces in Laos. The list also included the name of a Canadian civilian.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1—President Nixon, the Rev. Billy Graham and three Russian atheists were among the more than 3,000 people who attended the 21st National Prayer Breakfast here today and heard a longtime foe of the Vietnam war call it “a sin that has scarred the national soul.”
To the Editor: I am sorry that there was such little public notice of Secretary John A. Volpe's glorious exit from the Department of Transportation—his rejection of a major interstate highway route through an urban park.
Following are excerpts from a transcript of an interview between Marvin Kalb of the Columbia Broadcasting System and Henry A. Kissinger in Washington, as televised last night and recorded by The New York Times:
BURLINGTON, Feb. 1—Three companies with an employment potential of 300 people leased a three‐story brick building today in this city, which just lost 600 jobs because the Vietnam ceasefire closed the Army's Burlington ammunition plant.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 1—Four Americans were killed during the week that ended with the start of the Vietnam cease‐fire last Sunday, the United States military command said today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 —President President Nixon welcomed Prime Minister Heath of Britain to the White House today and said that because of the Vietnam settlement the United States could now concentrate on its relations with Europe —which he called “the cornerstone of American policy.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. I —Henry A. Kissinger said tonight that during his mission to Hanoi next week he would explore ways of moving relations between the United States and North Vietnam “from hostility toward normalization.”
SYDNEY, Australia, Feb. 1—Australia, whose troops helped to fight Communist insurgency in South Vietnam for more than 10 years, has instituted steps toward diplomatic relations with Hanoi.
President Nixon's decision to dispatch Henry Kissinger to Hanoi late next week is a beneficial omen for an uncertain peace.
PEKING, Feb. 2 (Reuters)—Almost the entire Chinese leadership led 10,000 people in a mass rally in Peking today to celebrate the Vietnam ceasefire.
WASHINGTON—“Peace that heals.” The phrase Seemed only a distant dream when President Nixon first uttered it in his Inaugural Address four years ago. But now, three days into his second term, the President has repeated the appealing words and delivered the results to back them up.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2—A disagreement has reportedly broken out within the Nixon Administration over whether the recently concluded agreement for a cease‐fire in Vietnam allows the United States to continue military aid to Laos and Cambodia.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 2—Some movement of Vietnamese Communist troops out of battle areas was reported here today, but there was difference of opinion as to its significance.
In this country and abroad many words have been spoken in recent years about the glowing prospects peaceful great‐power coexistence in the world; of the 1970's, if only the irritant of the Vietnam war could be removed. Now that the moment is at hand, all the diplomatic projects now under way or about to be launched assume a special importance.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 3—President Nguyen Van Thieu announced today.that he had ordered a senior diplomat, to begin talks in Paris with the Vietcong on the political future of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 3—President Nguyen Van Thieu announced to day that he had ordered a sen for diplomat to begin talks in Paris with the Vietcong on the political future of South Vietnam.
CAMP DAVID, Md., Feb. 2 (UPI) — President Nixon and Prime Minister Heath of Britain concluded nine hours of talks on matters ranging from trade and economics to the Vietnam peace settlement.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2—A disagreement has reportedly broken out within the Nixon Administration over whether the recently concluded agreement for a cease‐fire in Vietnam allows the United States to continue military aid to Laos and Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 3—After several days of fruitless debate, the International Commission of Control and Supervision voted this morning to send out its regional inspection teams on Monday, Canadian officials said, thus setting up the first machinery for actually monitoring the Vietnam cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 (AP)—Following is the text of President Nixon's State of the Union Message sent to Congress today:
No one at the St. Albans Naval Hospital in Queens knows exactly when the prisoners of war will arrive or how many will be processed there, but the staff of the 607‐bed hospital, now only half full, is ready and waiting. They are waiting not only for the returning Vietnam servicemen but also for their families who will arrive there for reunions.
WASHINGTON—Once again, President Nixon's ambassador extraordinary was preparing for another special conference. The site; Hanoi. The time: Feb. 10, to 13. The purpose: to begin a dialogue, that, could move relations with North Vietnam, “from hostility towards normalization.”
PHNOM PENH—The outlook for a cease‐fire in Cambodia is becoming more optimistic. Sporadic military clashes continue, but on a small scale, and there are signs that the North Vietnamese‐Vietcong component of the anti‐Government forces is reducing its activity and may be pulling away from areas of combat.
The first budget of the second Nixon Administration marks the end of an era that began with the pursuit of both guns and butter, the Vietnam war and the war on poverty, and ended with excessive inflation and excessive unemployment — and with the collapse of the international monetary system to boot.
To the Editor: The offer by United Nations Secretary General Waldheim to mount a strictly humanitarian reconstruction operation in Vietnam without any discrimination is a news item which is most timely and most welcome.
TRUCE OBSERVERS Communist and allied delegates to the Joint Military Commission and members of the International Commission of Control and Supervision of the Vietnam cease‐fire met for the first time today in Saigon. Officials said that the international commission would start sending out field inspection teams tomorrow.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb. 4—Communist delegates to the Joint Military Commission appeared in downtown Saigon today for the first time to meet with members of the International Commission of Control and Supervision of the Vietnam cease‐fire.
When the war has ended and the road is open again, the same stars will course through the heavens. Then will I weep for the white bones heaped together in desolate graves of those who sought military honors for their leaders. —From a diary of an unknown North Vietnamese soldier, 1965.
SYDNEY, Australia, Feb. 3—The new Labor Government of Prime Minister Gough Whitlam has run into severa image problems as it enters its third month in office, following a sweeping electoral victory Dec. 2 over the conservative coalition that had ruled for 23 years.
A Lady's Will
BANGUI, Central African Republic, Feb. 3 (Agence France‐Presse)—The two halfVietnamese daughters of President Jean Mel Bokassa, both called Martine and both 18 years old, have married Central African husbands.
SAN JOSE, Calif., Feb. 3—A decade of conflict in Vietnam has left a mark in this suburban community, as it has across America. Many people think and feel differently from what they ?? did. They ask questions, they reject assumptions, they doubt what they are told.
WASHINGTON‐Ice‐hard statements made during election campaigns have a way of melting in the glow of victory. But President Nixon made it clear last week that there would be no melting of his statements on the issue of amnesty for men who refused to serve during the Vietnam war.
TORONTO, Jan. 30 — Alan Kazmer, a 31‐year‐old advertising copywriter with the McCann‐Erickson agency here, stared into a glass of beer as he pondered the news from the United States.
SAIGON—Shrouded in secrecy, the seven American helicopters flew into a Communist‐held town about 70 miles north of Saigon. The aircraft picked up three score uniformed men and returned to Saigon's Tan Son Nhut airport. Out of one helicopter stepped Lieut. Gen. Tran Van Tra, the chief Vietcong delegate to the four‐party. Joint Military Commission that is to help monitor the cease‐fire in South Vietnam.
OTTAWA, Feb. 3—Canada's truce mission in Vietnam, now one week old, has stirred an embarrassing controversy here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb. 4 — Fighting in South Vietnam reportedly ground to a virtual halt yesterday, a week after the formal cease‐fire went into effect.
For almost five years, a simple gravestone in a military cemetery in St. Louis has marked the mass grave of nine Marines, casualties of the battle of Khe Sanh in South Vietnam in February, 1968. The nine bodies were found after an American patrol was ambushed.
MOSCOW—“New possibilities for easing tensions, for consolidating security and world peace open now. The political settlement in Vietnam can be expected to have a positive effect on relations among states involved in one way or another in events in Indochina. Moreover, this shows it is possible to find a peaceful and just solution of other conflicts, to liquidate the danger from existing hotbeds of war, above all in the Middle East....”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 3—Now that a peace agreement in Vietnam has been reached, members of the Nixon Administration have undertaken to discredit the critics of the President's conduct of the war and of peace negotiations.
The International Rescue Committee reports that it is planning to participate in major relief and rehabilitation efforts in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 5—In the first major step toward monitoring the Vietnam cease‐fire, which began a week ago Sunday, the International Commission of Control and Supervision this morning dispatched seven regional teams around South Vietnam.
ROME, Feb. 4 (Reuters) —Pope Paul VI said today that the Vietnam cease‐fire was full of violations and stressed the need for justice, brotherhood and universal peace.
An Army general and a colonel charged in a nationwide television broadcast last night that a “hoax” had been perpetrated by retired Lieut. Col. Anthony B. Herbert, a highly decorated veteran of the Korean and Vietnam wars, in his contention that he was removed from command because of his complaints about war crimes in Vietnam.
HONOLULU, Feb. 4 (AP)—The Pacific military command reported that United States aircraft, including B‐52 bombers, continued operations over Laos today at the request of the Laotian Government. No details of the bombing were disclosed. The operations have continued daily since the Vietnam ceasefire began.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 4—Sybil Stockdale bought a new Persian rug last year on her 25th wedding anniversary, but she has not put it down yet. She is waiting for her husband, Capt. James Bond Stockdale, who has been a prisoner in North Vietnam for almost eight years.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Feb. 4—Military sources said today that military escorts have been told to change the subject tactfully if a returning American prisoner of war begins discussing possible violations of the military code he might have committed in captivity.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 4—Sybil Stockdale bought a new Persian rug last year on her 25th wedding anniversary, but she has not put it down yet. She is waiting for her husband, Capt. James Bond Stockdale, who has been a prisoner in North Vietnam for almost eight years.
Reduced Pare for the Elderly
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Monday, Feb. 5—Only isolated minor incidents broke the truce in South Vietnam yesterday as the cease‐fire moved into its second week.
President Nixon dispatched Henry Kissinger to Hanoi with a commendable mission to advance the cause reconciliation. Yet, at the same time, Mr. Nixon closed his heart and mind to pleas for similar acts of reconciliation toward his own country's draft resisters and antiwar exiles.
LONDON, Feb. 4—Mr. Kissinger is right. It would be hard to find any American who from the beginning took a consistent, principled position on Vietnam. There are not many claimants for the holiness award.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 5—An official spokesman said yesterday that the meeting in Saigon between the heads of the two peacekeeping commissions was “one of the most constructive steps” accomplished in a week. The commissioners met earlier in the day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 4 — They had been marking time, waiting for the cease‐fire. But now the last G.I.'s in Vietnam are moving out, most of them heading back to “the world,” as they call home.
Secretary General Kurt Waldheim's offer of a United Nations relief and reconstruction program “to all the peoples of Vietnam without discrimination” is one that should be taken up with alacrity by all sides, especially the United States.
LONDON, Feb. 4 (UPI)—A British Labor party delegation will leave Thursday on a factfinding tour of North Vietnam and South Vietnam, a party spokesman said today.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 5 — An authoritative Cambodian source said today that the United States had assured this county that it would resume bombing in Cambodia if the North Vietnamese troops resumed offensive operations against Government troops.
President Nixon's popularity rating reached 68 per cent, matching his previous high, point, following the announcement of the peace settlement in Vietnam, according to the latest Gallup Poll.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 5—The Saigon Government has reportedly released thousands of military and civilian prisoners in the last few days, turning them loose on their own despite provisions of the Paris cease‐fire accord requiring that they be turned over to North Vietnam or the Vietcong.
PARIS, Feb. 5 — Delegates from the Saigon Government and the Vietcong met alone together here today for the first time. Their purpose was to prepare for the South Vietnamese political negotiations provided in the cease‐fire agreements. The negotiations are to test whether the hostile sides can eventually reach a nonviolent settlement to their generation‐long dispute.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5—The State Department said today that it was clearly understood by North Vietnam that the United. States could continue military aid to Laos and Cambodia under the agreement for a cease‐fire in Vietnam.
MY THO, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 6—International peace‐keeping teams fanned out across South Vietnam yesterday, but had not yet begun their work of monitoring violations of the cease‐fire pact.
SAIGON, South Vietnam,: Feb. 5 (UPI—Attempts by newsmen to cover the first deployment of Vietnam truce inspectors were blocked at at least three of the sites, where the cease‐fire teams arrived today.
The drive for total amnesty for all war resisters will take a new dimension in Paris from Feb. 19 to 22, when three groups hall a strategy conference for exiles and their supporters. 
To the Editor: The Jap. 13 Op‐Ed article entitled “The Conflict Over the Delaney Clause” requires clarification of the basic issue.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5—The Army buried one of its own today, Bill Nolde.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 5 (Reuters)—Michel Gauvin of Canada today was named chairman of the International Commission of Control and Supervision, the four‐nation organization charged with policing the Vietnam cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5—The interesting thing about President Nixon's nomination to receive the Nobel Peace Prize is that he did not intervene to stop his admirers from entering his name in this unhappy competition.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5—One of the mysteries of the Vietnam war has been the other side, those South Vietnamese Communists and nationalists who—with the support of North Vietnam—have battled the Saigon Government and the United States to a standstill.
MY THO, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 6—International peace‐keeping teams fanned out across South Vietnam yesterday, but had not yet begun their work of monitoring violations of the cease‐fire accord.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5 (UPI) —A team of United States Navy demolition experts headed by Rear Adm. Brian McCauley met in Haiphong today with the city harbormaster and other North Vietnamese officials to discuss plans for clearing away American mines and reopening the port the Pentagon reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 5—The Saigon Government has reportedly released thousands of military, and civilian prison ers in the last few days, turn ing them loose on their own despite provisions of the Paris cease‐fire accord requiring that they be turned over to North Vietnam or the Vietcong.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6—The Defense Department announced today that four United States Navy minesweepers had been ordered to begin clearing an anchorage on the approaches to Haiphong Harbor as a preliminary step toward destroying hundreds of mines that have blocked North Vietnamese ports for nine months.
MANILA, Feb. 6 —The commander of the Seventh Fleet said today that the role of the fleet would not change basically despite the Vietnam cease‐fire. “It will maintain the balance of power,” said the fleet commander, Vice Adm. James L. Holloway 3d, in a talk with the press on the guidedmissile cruiser Oklahoma City, which is visiting here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 7 —The first United States prisoners of war May be released on Saturday In Hanoi, the chairman of the International Commission of Control and Supervision said yesterday.
Eight years to the day after the United States opened its devastating bombardment of North Vietnam, the warring parties have announced agreement to convene the Vietnam peace conference. Starting Feb. 26 in Paris, diplomats of the Soviet Union, China and the United States will sit down with representatives of the Vietnamese combatants, plus Britain, France and the four nations supervising the cease‐fire. This diplomatic assemblage will stand as the first test of great‐power responsibility in the post‐Vietnam war era.
WASHINGTON—Recently I met with Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh. My only disappointment was that every American could not share in the joy of Vietnam's victory. By any standards, it is incredible.
After the return of the prisoners from Vietnam, after all the consoling ceremonies at the White House, and the family reunions and tears on television, the reality for the prisoners coining home at last will begin in private. When they come home from Vietnam, what will they find?
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6—Nixon Administration officials believe that the prospects for resolving the current “no‐war no‐peace” situation in the Middle East have improved with the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement, but for the moment they plan no major new initiative to bring the Arabs and Israelis closer together. As King Hussein of Jordan begins his visit to Washington, officials say that although President Nixon has declared that the Middle. East will get “a very high priority” this year, the White House—preoccupied with Indochina—has not yet had time to focus its full attention on that part of the world.
Pension Reform Bill: A ‘Sham’
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6—The White House today announced a further effort to achieve cease‐fire in Laos and plans for an international conference that will try to solidify last month's Vietnam cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6—The White House today announced a further effort to achieve a cease‐fire in Laos and plans for an international conference that will try to solidify last month's Vietnam cease‐fire.
NEW DELHI, Feb. 6—Prime Minister Indira Gandhi bitterly attacked American policy in Asia today, despite quiet diplomatic efforts in recent weeks to soothe the strained and chilly relations between India and the United States.
The following dispatch, distributed by The. Associated Press, 4 by Louise Hickman Lione of The Philadelphia Inquirer, who has just completed a visit to Hanoi. Transmission was delayed bedtime of review by the North Vietnamese.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 6 (UPI) — American troops are leaving South Vietnam at a rate of more than 400 a day, the United States command said today. There were 19,500 in the country as of Sunday, the lowest number since September, 1964.
SYDNEY, Australia, Feb. 6—Prime Minister Gough Whitlam announced today that Australia plans to begin negotiations for establishment of diplomatic relations with North Vietnam next week.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6—Many of the prisoners of war, upon their release, will find several thousand dollars awaiting them in pay, savings and bonuses that accumulated while they were in captivity.
Pentagon sources said yesterday that Communist forces in South Vietnam would release 27 American prisoners of war on Sunday. [Page 1, Column 1.]
HONOLULU, Feb. 7 (UPI)—The United States Pacific forces command reported today that American aircraft conducted bombing missions over Laos for the 11th straight day since the start of the Vietnam ceasefire.
SAN JOSE, Calif., Feb, 7 —When Lieut. Comdr. Everett Alvarez went away to war, he believed in his country, and the battles it was fighting in Southeast Asia. Soon he will be coming home, home to a family, and to many countrymen, who feel that his sacrifice of eight and one‐half years in a North Vietnamese prison camp was a waste of time.
To the Editor: What is especially disturbing about President Nixon's special counsel Charles Colson's Jan. 30 Op‐Ed article, “The Georgetown Blacking Factory,” is not the importance of the charges it makes—for they are as absurd as those Mr. Colson claims were made by his “adversaries”—but the care with which, he sought to set the record straight on a matter of colossal unimportance, except for propaganda purposes. President Nixon has gathered around him a large group of P. R. men to “get the record straight” who can only be described as amateur Josef Goebbelses.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7—Pentagon sources said today that Communist forces plan to release 27 American prisoners of war Sunday from jungle camps in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7 (UPI) —Henry A. Kissinger left today on a two‐week mission to Hanoi and Peking to begin repairing the damages of a decade of war in Indochina.
OTTAWA, Feb. 7—Canada today formally recognized the Government of North Vietnam, giving it “equal diplomatic status” with that of the South.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Feb. 8 — The two peace‐keeping commissions set pp by the Paris agreement spent another day dealing with preliminary procedural problems yesterday, while a sharp upsurge of fighting was reported from Pleiku in the Central Highlands.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7—Pentagon sources said today that Communist forces plan to release 27 American prisoners of war Sunday from jungle camps in South Vietnam.
OTTAWA, Feb. 7—In the anxious weeks before the Vietnam cease‐fire the Canadian Government hesitated about taking a supervisory role that everyone knew would be long and troublesome.
PARIS, Feb. 7—Vietcong and Saigon Government representatives met here again today and reported further progress on arranging for the start of political negotiations in South Vietnam. They agreed to meet again Saturday.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 7 (Reuters)—Communist troops renewed their attacks on Cambodian Government positions near the South Vietnamese border as heavy activity was reported on nearby infiltration trails, the military command said today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7 (AP) —Senator Robert Dole, former Republican national chairman, called today for a Congressional investigation of the causes and origins of United States involvement in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7—The Nixon Administration respond. ed today with a combination of hock and irritation at stateents by Prime Minister Indira andhl of India yesterday that ere sharply critical of the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 7—The small, widely scattered battles that have continued since the cease‐fire have driven some 200,000 people from their homes at least briefly, officials here said today.
The current Asian journey of Henry Kissinger will lay the groundwork for the future role of the United States in Indochina and its relations with the emerging powers across the Pacific. In signaling just how low will be the American profile in postwar Asia, Mr. Kissinger's nuances will be as important as his overview—and his hosts in Hanoi, Vientiane and Peking are not exactly novices in sensing nuance.
LONG DINH, South Vietnam, Feb. 8—Mrs, Tran Thi Anh was harvesting her rice here today, winnowing the dry brown stalks to separate the grain, when the first artillery rounds began landing near her field.
To the Editor: In his press conference on Jan. 31, President Nixon was so incautious as to cite Harry Truman'S impounding of the funds appropriated for a 70‐group Air Force, of which Truman had decided that a 48‐group of war planes was adequate. As such; Mr. Nixon underlined inescapably the most decisive issue around which his impounding of funds and budgetary cuts for protection of the environment, for health, education; housing and welfare in favor of a $4.2‐billion, budget increase for the military will be vehemently opposed, especially in the fate of the end of the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8—Secretary of State William P. Rogers was warned by members of a House committee today that the Nixon Administration's proposals to provide a postwar economic aid program to North Vietnam were encountering growing public opposition.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 8 (UPI)—The Government detained 23 newsmen briefly today and seized their press cards wnen they tried to talk with North Vietnamese and Vietcong members of the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8 — A B‐52 pilot who refused to fly more bombing raids in Vietnam after 175 missions has been granted a discharge from the Air Force.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8—Secretary of State William P. Rogers was warned by members of a House committee today that the Nixon Administration's proposals to provide postwar economic aid program to North Vietnam were encountering growing public opposition.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8 —Mayor Lindsay appealed to the New York City Congressional delegation today to push for increased Federal domestic programs now that the nation's involvement in Vietnam was winding down.
LOS ANGELES, Feb. 8—The jury in the Pentagon papers trial started today to get an “education” about the Vietnam war and also about documents that the Government contends contain military secrets.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Feb. 8—Young diplomats and paunchy middle‐aged airplane mechanics are quietly replacing the professional soldiers who have been in the forefront of the United States establishment in South Vietnam for 10 years.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8 — A B‐52 pilot who refused to fly more bombing raids in Vietnam after 175 missions has been granted a discharge from the Air Force, his civilian lawyer said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 9—Steps toward carrying out the terms of the agreement for a Vietnam ceasefire dragged yesterday, but there were a few signs of progress.
A noon protest action yesterday by thousands of employes in 33 voluntary hospitals delayed lunch service to some of the institutions' 15,000 patients, but there was no major disruption of patient care, hospital officials said. Medical attendants, technicians and others among the more than 15,000 people on duty at the time gave up their lunch hours to protest the Federal Pay Board's rollback of an 8.3 per cent wage and benefit increase awarded for the 33,000 voluntary‐hospital employes last July. The increase had not been paid pending the board's ruling, which cut the increase to 5.5 per cent.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 8—At the Naval Hospital here yesterday, a local garden club was hauling in a load of plants to decorate the rooms set aside for returning prisoners of war.
TOKYO, Feb. 8 (Reuters)—Foreign Minister Chi Peng‐fei of China will attend the international conference on Vietnam starting in Paris Feb. 26, the Kyodo news agency reported today in a dispatch from Peking.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 9— A Government spokesman announced today that President Nguyen Van Thieu had begun a series of discussions with political and religious leaders, in what was regarded by some American officials as a first step in trying to unify non‐Communist elements in preparation for eventual elections open to Communist candidates.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 9—The chairman of the new International Control Commission asserted today that an effective cease‐fire was being delayed because the Saigon Government and the Communists have been unable to agree on clear lines separating the territories they hold.
NEW DELHI, Feb. 9—Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, seeking to smooth India's strained relations with the United States, suggested today that her recent remarks on Vietnam were not intended to offend any country.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—The Pentagon announced today that North Vietnam planned to release about 115 American prisoners of war in Hanoi sometime Sunday night, Eastern standard time, while 27 more prisoners would be turned over by the Vietcong in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietndin, Feb 9 (AP)—Capt. Michael J. Heck, the Young B‐52 pilot granted discharge from the Air Force for “other than, honorable” reasons after he had refused to fly A mission over North Vietnam on Dec. 26, said today that he was planning a legal appeal of that type of discharge.
CARBONDALE, Ill—Robert Cutler, architect of the developed National Security Council organization under President Eisenhower, was a Boston banker. Penetrating in understanding and precise in detail, he chaired the security council planning board with care and fairness, seeking agreed recommendations or, if these were not attainable, an exact presentation of diverse views for the benefit of the President. He was a cautious, deliberative man who weighed risks carefully; as bankers should be, he was a prudent man.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 9 (UPI)—A total of 1,200 American servicemen left South Vietnam this week, reducing United States strength there to 18,600 men, military spokesmen said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 9—The chairman of the new International Control Commission asserted today that an effective cease‐fire was being delayed because the Saigon Government and the Communists have been unable to agree on clear lines separating the territories they hold.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—The Pentagon announced today that North Vietnam planned to release about 115 American prisoners of war in Hanoi sometime Sunday night, Eastern standard time, while 27 more prisoners would be turned over by the Vietcong in South Vietnam.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Feb. 9—A few days ago, Sgt. 1st Cl. Horace Purifoy and Sgt. 1st Cl. Robert L. Cutting of the Army walked over to the base uniform store to polish buttons and other brass belonging to two men they have never met but already know.
BETHESDA, Md., Feld. 9 —The first entry is the inauguration of President Johnson in January, 1965; the last, the June, 1971, Supreme Court decision on state aid to nonpublic schools. Packed into the pages between is a cram course in events‐that‐were‐current in the world outside the prisonerof‐war camps in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—The United States and North Vietnam agreed secretly in their negotiations in Paris last month that a ban on foreign military activity in Laos and Cambodia would not take effect immediately, sources in the Nixon Administration reported today.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Saturday, Feb. 10—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser for national security, left here today for Hanoi, saying that he expected his trip would “usher in an era of peace” for all of Indochina.
PARIS, Feb. 10—The Vietcong charged today that the Communist military delegates who are in Saigon to help oversee the cease‐fire were being treated “shamefully.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 (AP) —The Pentagon announced today the names of the American military prisoners of war who are in the first group, scheduled to be released Sunday night, Eastern standard time, from Communist camps in North and South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10—The Nixon Administration is reportedly preparing to withdraw 5,000 to 6,000 troops from Taiwan but, at the same time, is moving to enable the Nationalist Chinese Government there to become selfsufficient in modern jet fighters.
LOS ANGELES—Some have suffered captivity for only a few months, others for eight years . . some were injured, others escaped without a scratch ... some will slip back easily into their prewar lives, others will never fully recover.
The success of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement, Henry Kissinger said, “depends not only on its provisions, but also on the spirit in which it is implemented.” Now, after two weeks of truce, there is real progress, though more is needed.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Feb. 10—Vice President Agnew reported to President Nixon today on his just‐concluded trip to Southeast Asia, saying that Asian leaders were interested hi the “attitude” of South Vietnam's President Nguyen Van Thieu.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 (UPI)—Maj. Floyd J. Thompson of the Army, for nine years a captive of the Vietcong, has been held an enemy prisoner longer than any other American in all the wars of United States history.
AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Feb. 10—Controversy over proposed visit of an all‐white South African rugby team to New Zealand is growing into a national crisis. Already it had divided this country more bitterly than at the height of demonstrations over participation in the Vietnam war.
LOS ANGELES, Feb. 10—As the first American prisoners start their journey home tomorrow night, they will move from a world of silence to a world of noise, from slow motion to speed, from isolation to crowds, from idleness to activity and from the company of military men to the company of wives, children and friends.
SAIGON—It was not happening precisely according to the timetable laid down by the Paris accord, and there was some apparent tampering by the Saigon Government with the spirit if not the letter of the cease‐fire agree ment, but peace in South Vietnam seemed last week to be acquiring a momentum of its own. And the first batch of American prisoners of war was about to be released.
NEW DELHI, Feb. 10 — An international assembly of more than 200 intellectuals, meeting here to discuss Asian problems, ended this week with the consensus that Asian countries should solve their problems themselves without outside help.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10 (UPI)—A spokesman for the Canadian delegation to the International Commission for Control and Supervision said today that plans for news coverage of the first prisone release in South Vietnam Monday had apparently been dropped.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10—Two weeks after a ceasefire officially went into effect, relatively small‐scale fighting was continuing over much of Vietnam and the machinery to detect and possibly deter the violations had not even begun to work.
IN A VIETCONG ZONE South Vietnam, Feb. 8 (Reuters —In 24 hours with the Viet cong I drank tea, shared meal, chatted about the West—and ran for cover with then when a South Vietnamese heli copter gunship sprayed a vil lage in a raid lasting more that half an hour.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Phil—ippines, Feb. 10—The clocks on the wall inside the Joint Homecoming Reception Center Command Post read “Hanoi,” “Local,” “Hawaii,” “Wash. D.C.” and “Zulu”—the Air Force way of saying Greenwich mean time.
To the Editor: The tragedy of America's involvement in Vietnam is not that the U. S. chose to stand and fight against Communist, aggression, but that we chose to stand and fight so badly. Never have such self‐defeating restrictions been placed on the use of American military power.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 —While the United States has a commitment to aid in the reconstruction of the four countries of Indochina, beyond that general pledge all is uncertainty.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Feb. 10—Henry A. Kissinger arrived here today to discuss postwar United States relations with North Vietnam.
The Gordon E. Bakers of Huntington, L. I., and the James P. Welshes of Winstead, Conn., along with scores of other American families, will stand by their telephones once more tomorrow—this time to hear a familiar voice confirm to them the end of a long and often agonizing wait.
DA NANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 10 (Reuters)—The last American fighting unit in South Vietnam was formally disbanded today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 11—The Saigon Government has abruptly replaced the head of its delegation to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission, a military spokesman said tonight.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 11—Roger Chapin, who has raised More than $4.5‐million in public donations sover the last five years to demonstrate the American people's “heartfelt affection” for their fighting men, is encountering rough going in his latest enterprise: to give every homecoming prisoner of war a free vacation in Acapulo, Hawaii, the Virgin Islands or come other lush vacation spot.
WASHINGTON—In 1973, as in 1962 and 1954, warring parties in Indochina entered into military and political agreements to stop the fighting and move toward a stable peace. For the sake of the long‐suffering Vietnamese and other Indochinese people to whose tragic plight we have undeniably contributed and also in our own selfinterest, the United States should take all reasonable steps to reduce the likelihood of a resumption of war.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Monday, Feb. 12—Operation Homecoming—the repatriation of American prisoners of the Vietnam war—began here today.
President Nixon has achieved his objective of shifting the armed services from partial reliance on conscription to an all‐volunteer basis. He has also cut the size of the armed services from their Vietnam peak of 3.5 million persons to 2.3 million.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 11—The Saigon Government has abruptly replaced the head of its delegation to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission, a military spokesman said tonight.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Feb. 11 (AP) — President Nixon said today that Americans should respect the privacy of the returning prisoners of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 12—The release of 27 Americans who were scheduled to be the first United States prisoners of war freed under the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement was delayed this morning, apparently because of a dispute over an exchange of Communist prisoners.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Monday, Feb. 12—The repatriation of American prisoners of the Vietnam war began today.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Feb. 11 (Reuters) — Henry A. Kissinger met for six hours today with North Vietnamese Government officials for a second round of talks on American postwar relations with North Vietnam, the Western White House said.
The release of 27 Americans who were scheduled to be the first United States prisoners of war freed under the Vietnam ceasefire agreement was delayed this morning, apparently because of a dispute over an exchange of Communist prisoners. The release had been set for 8:30 A.M. Saigon time (7:30 P.M. Sunday, New York Times), but by midmorning it had not been made. [Page 1, Column 8.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 12—The release of 27 Americans who were scheduled to be the first United States prisoners of war freed under the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement was delayed this afternoon, apparently because of a dispute over an exchange of Communist prisoners.
The repatriation of American prisoners in Vietnam began this morning with the ceremonial turnover at Hanoi's Gia Lam airport of three planeloads of men. The first of three Air Force medical jets arrived two hours behind schedule because of early morning rain and ground fog in Hanoi. Prisoners began boarding the plane after a ceremony at the airfield. [Page 1, Colunin 8.]
Joe Frazier, the former heavyweight champion, and Johnny Unitas, the quarterback, have called them up with personal greetings at Christmaslime. Jerry Lucas, the Knicks's forward, is preparing a magic show for them. Ron Swoboda of the Yankees is going to have them at the Stadium this spring.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 13 — After 12 hours of debate and anguishing delay, 27 American prisoners of war held in South Vietnam were freed last night by the Vietcong, flown to Saigon and then rushed to Clark Air Base in the Philippines.
SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 12—Francis M. Goodell, 22 years old, of Manassas, Va., Vietnam war veteran who hijacked an airliner with 58 persons aboard last July, was sentenced today to 30 years in prison.
PARIS, Feb. 12 (UPI) — The Vietcong side accused South Vietnam and the United States today of repeated violations of the Vietnam peace agreement and warped that it “will not go on tolerating” them.
Twenty scholarships of $1,000 a year each will be offered to Vietnam veterans enrolling next fall in the New York University General Studies program, the school's director of financial aid, Raymond J. Brienza, announced yesterday. Combat veterans will be given priority. The regular tuition fee is $2,700 a year.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Tuesday, Feb. 13 — The first released American prisoners of the Vietnam war were greeted with cheers of welcome and tears of joy here yesterday as they stepped off military evacuation jets. They looked in better physical condition than most onlookers had expected, and the hospital commander here pronounced their general health “reasonably good.”
They are strong men, as President Nixon said after watching the first planeloads of Vietnam war prisoners return to American hands. In the understated words of Navy Capt. Jeremiah A. Denton, they were called to “serve our country under difficult circumstances”—indeed, among the most difficult this Republic has demanded of its sons.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Feb. 12 (Agence FrancePresse)—Buses still bearing the camouflage paint of war arrived at the civilian airport at Gia Lam this morning carrying American prisoners of war in their last moments of captivity.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 12 (UPI) —The Pentagon announced today that it was setting up a new Southeast Asian headquarters at a base in Thailand to control teams searching for missing United States servicemen and to direct any air activity after March 28.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 12—With the first release today of American prisoners in Vietnam, Washington and Hanoi began the final act of a lengthy drama in which the prisoners became pawns in a political and military struggle.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Tuesday, Feb. 13 — The first released American prisoners of the Vietnam war were greeted with cheers of welcome and tears of joy here yesterday as they stepped off military evacuation jets. They looked in better physical condition than most onlookers had expected, and the hospital commander here pronounced their general health “reasonably good.”
TOKYO, Feb. 12—A voice out of Vietnam's past was heard here today as the exiled emperor, Bao Dai, made a bid to return to his homeland as a “national arbiter.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 13 — After 12 hours of debate and anguishing delay, 27 American prisoners of war held in South Vietnam were freed last night by the Vietcong, flown to Saigon and then rushed to Clark Air Base in the Philippines.
BIEN HOA, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 13—The first 140 South Vietnamese prisoners of war released by the Communists joyously stepped off American transport planes here shortly after sundown yesterday.
“I was so tickled to see my son get off the plane, I just sat at that television like I was glued there.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 14—Why did Richard G. Waldhaus stay in Vietnam Monday when the 142 other American prisoners freed by the Communists flew to Clark Air Base in the, Philippines?
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Wednesday, Feb. 14 —The first two returned war prisoners departed for the United States last night and another planeload of about 20 were scheduled to leave for home today. Meanwhile the men who were released by the Vietnamese Communists on Monday were treated to beer, banana splits, a movie and a shopping trip to the base exchange.
The White House Press Office is now able to speak fluently in six languages, all from the tongue of Andrew T. Falkiewicz, who was born 43 years ago in Poland and has been working for, the United States Information Agency for 17 years. Mr. Falkiewicz, a United‐States citizen since 1954, speaks English, Polish, Czech, German, French and Russian fluently. His White House duties, which he assumed last month, include dealing with the 1,000 foreign correspondents‐300 of them in Washington—who work in this country. His salary is about $30,000 a year. He was said to have been “discovered” by Ronald L. Zeigler, the White House Press Secretary, while working at the American Embassy in Moscow during President Nixon's visit there last year.
WASHINGTON—This has become a kind of Middle East period for the White House. King Hussein of Jordan visited President Nixon last week to stress that, with the Vietnam war over and both Moscow and Peking playing up to Washington, it is time for a fresh United States initiative. And Israel's Goida Meir arrives in just over a fortnight.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 13—North Vietnam, in what appears to be a goodwill gesture, has agreed to release 20 more American prisoners of war within the next few days, the Pentagon announced today. The decision to release the prisoners ahead of schedule was linked by a Pentagon spokesman to Henry A. Kissinger's visit to Hanoi over the weekend.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 13 (AP) —President Nixon ordered today that all flags be raised to full staff tomorrow to honor returning prisoners of war and American casualties in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 14—The Saigon Government and the Communists exchanged 1,021 more prisoners of war yesterday on a battered metal airstrip in the little town of Loc Ninh, 77 miles north of here.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Wednesday, Feb. 14 —The first two returned war prisoners departed for the United States last night and another planeload of about 20 were scheduled to leave for home today. Meanwhile the men who were released by the Vietnamese Communists on Monday were treated to beer banana splits, a movie and a shopping trip to the base exchange.
HONG KONG, Feb. 13—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser for national security, arrived here today, for two days of rest between visits to Hanoi and Peking.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Phillipines, Feb. 13 (AP)—There was general sympathy here today for one former prisoner of war who, after calling his wife in the United States, was said to have walked down a hospital corridor saying, “My God, she did it, she did it, she did it.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 13—North Vietnam, in what appears to be a goodwill gesture, has agreed to release 20 more American prisoners of war within the next few days, the Pentagon announced today. The decision to release the prisoners ahead of schedule was linked by a Pentagon spokesman to Henry A. Kissinger's visit to Hanoi over the weekend.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Feb. 13—He came off the plane shyly like most of the 26 other Americans released by the Vietcong yesterday.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 13 (AP)—The first two of the returning United States prisoners of war stepped onto their native soil with a salute tonight, after an hour's delay while their plane circled an airfield with wing flap trouble.
BIEN HOA, South Vietnam, Feb. 14—The young South Vietnamese soldier, fresh from a Communist prison camp, shuffled tentatively toward the old woman. For moment she hesitated. Then, crying and shrieking with joy, the woman recognized her son and clutched his arm.
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1973
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Feb. 14—The first full planeload of returning prisoners, symbol and victims of decade of agonizing war in Southeast Asia, came home today.
Senator James L. Buckley declared yesterday that granting general amnesty to draft evaders and deserters now that the war in Vietnam is over “would be to reward those who chose to escape their duty at the expense of those who discharged it.”
There is a bottle of champagne in the Abbott home on Rensterville Road in Alloway, N. J., that has been chilling there since October, 1968. It will bbe opened when Maj. Joseph S. Abbott Jr. of the Air Force returns home from North Vietnam some time soon.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 14—The United States and North Vietnam announced today that they had agreed to establish a Joint Economic Commission to chaimer postwar American reconstruction aid to North Vietnam.The formation of the commission—scheduled to begin work in about a month—was announced in a communiqué issued here and in Hanoi on the four days of talks held by Henry A. Kissinger with Premier Pham Van Dong and other North Vietnamese officials from Sunday to yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Feb. 15 — The chief of the United States delegation to the Joint Military Commission has urged the Vietcong to speed the deployment of their cease‐fire supervisory teams, an official United States spokesman said yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 14—The United States and North Vietnam announced today that they had agreed to establish a Joint Economic Commission to channel postwar American reconstruction aid to North Vietnam.
QUANG TRI, South Vietnam, Feb. 14 (AP)—The Saigon Government freed 175 disabled North Vietnamese prisoners today in 10 fiberglass boats.
The 10 per cent devaluation of the United States dollar was indeed a bold action necessitated by the chaos in the international money markets, but it scarcely provides occasion for Mr. Nixon to claim a triumph for the way he has managed the American economy. On the contrary, the Administration's policies have done much to exacerbate a situation that had been in the making for a decade—partly because of the Vietnam war.
PARIS, Feb. 14 — Although continuing official Vietnam meetings remain focused on the stability of the cease‐fire, various talks are getting under way between the rival South Vietnamese factions about their country's political future.
JERSEY CITY, Feb. 12—More than 75 outdoor billboards in six northern New Jersey counties are displaying posters that commemorate the Vietnam peace.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 14 (AP) —Following is the text of the United States‐North Vietnamese communiqué issued today after Henry A. Kissinger's visit to Hanoi.
PARIS, Feb. 14 (AP—Delegates from South Vietnam and the Vietcong held their fourth meeting today to work out procedural details for political negotiations in Saigon.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 14—Mrs. Anita Woods, near death in the intensive care unit of Coronado Hospital, told her doctor in frail whisper today that “the [bravery of my son and his safe return have given me a new determination to live.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 14 (Reuters)—American minesweepers have cleared an anchorage in the Gulf of Tonkin for the naval force that will clear the mines from North Vietnamese waters, the Defense Department said today.
??ning prisoners of war are coming home with little public fanfare, but many of them will find an unexpected flood of homecoming gift offers from generous—and, some fear, self‐serving—donors.
CLARK AIR BASE, Philippines, Thursday, Feb. 15 (AP) —An American pilot reported to have made antiwar statements while a prisoner of war in North Vietnam said in a news conference today that “at no time during my imprisonment have I failed to support my President and my country and my President's policy.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 15—The focus of American foreign policy is now obviously moving away from the war in Vietnam to the great economic questions now troubling the nations, and this is bringing new men and new problems to the fore in Washington.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15—South Vietnam threatened today to hold up the release of Communist prisoners of war if the Communists continued to delay the return of prisoners they hold.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15—Richard G. Waldhaus, 60 American prisoner who remained in Vietnam after his release by the Vietcong Monday, left today for home, the United States Embassy reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 16 (UPI) — An unarmed United States CH47 supply helicopter assigned to the four‐power Joint Military Commission was shot down today and crashed in flames while returning from An Loc, according to reports from the field.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 15—The Pentagon today announced a significant increase in United States air strikes against North Vietnamese and Pathet La?? troop and munitions movements in Laos.
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Feb. 15 —When Mrs. Helen Brunstrom was unpacking her husband's duffle bag last night, she found a pair of worn sandals and a small cup and spoon, the only utensils he had used during almost seven years in a North Vietnamese prison camp.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15 — The South Vietnamese military police today barred a group of foreign newsmen and several senior members of the international peacekeeping commission from attending a reception given by the Vietcong.
PORTSMOUTH, Va., Feb. 15 —For three of the first group of prisoners of war to return home, life here is an overflowing bowl of cherries, replete with champagne, T‐bone steaks and lobster.
The first of the institutions for shaping the United States role in the Asia of the 1970's has now emerged from the rubble of the Vietnam war. Creation of a United States‐North Vietnam Joint Economic Commisskon for planning postwar reconstruction is a modest start—and a welcome sign that the Nixon Administration and North Vietnamese Politburo are willing to continue regarding each other in the spirit of goodwill that led to the cease‐fire.
To the Editor: Elliot Richardson preaches that we should “keep it local” (Op‐Ed Jan. 31) and “. . . give states, cities and citizens the power and authority they need to make decisions affecting their existence.” These are unexceptionable. sentiments but, they mask what seems to be a deliberate campaign to destroy New York and other Urge cities and preserve, deep poverty as an American way of living.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Feb. 15 — A senior American war prisoner, released in Hanoi three days ago, said here today that to his knowledge not one of his fellow prisoners of war held in North Vietnam was against President Nixon's Vietnam war policies.
PEKING, Feb. 15—Henry A. Kissinger arrived here by air today from Hong Kong for consultations with Chinese leaders.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 15—The Pentagon today announced a significant increase in United States air strikes against North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troop and munitions movements in Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15 — The machinery to provide international supervision of the Vietnam cease‐fire is not working, and a speedy solution to the problems is not in sight.
BIEN HOA, South Vietnam, Feb. 15 — The South Vietnamese sergeant almost growled as he talked about how life had been in the Communist prisoner‐of‐war camps.
Outside the white‐shingled colonial home on Plymouth Stieet in Montclair, N.J., an Americana flag flew yesterday. Inside the atmosphere was filled with anticipation.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 15—His eyes brimming with tears and his voice breaking, Secretary of State William P. Rogers appealed for national unity today, and said, in a reference to the returning prisoners of war: “I think it is time that all of us took a little pride in our country.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15 (AP)—American troop strength in South Vietnam has fallen to its lowest level in nearly a decade as the United States is approaching the halfway mark in withdrawing its military forces by March 28, the United States Command reported today.
To the Editor: Wilbur Mills' position on a United States grant of most‐favored‐nation status to the Soviet Union, though solicitous of the civil rights of Soviet citizens, poses grave policy questions for the future of American trade liberalization.
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Feb. 16 (AP) — A new wave of flights brought home today 60 more freed American prisoners of war, including Lieut. Comdr. Everett Alvarez, the first American flier shot down in the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 17—The chiefs of the four‐party Joint Military Commission today made what they called an urgent appeal to the Communist and Saigon commands “to promptly issue orders” to halt any further fighting in South Vietnam.
PHOENIXVILLE, Pa., Feb. 16 —Pvt. Ferdinand Rodriguez of Brooklyn, a prisoner of war in Vietnam for the last five years, ate lunch with his family at Valley Forge General Hospital today and met his niece and nephew for the first time.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 16—The United States Army Court of Military Review upheld today the murder conviction of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. for his role in the My Lai killings and approved his sentence of 20 years' confinement at hard labor.
PEKING, Feb. 16 (Reuters)—Henry A. Kissinger today had his first round of substantive talks with Chinese leaders, including Premier Chou En‐lai.
MY THO, South Vietnam, Feb. 16—The two commissions to carry out and supervise the Vietnam cease‐fire maintain regional headquarters in this Mekong Delta town 40 miles south of Saigon, but they are inactive and almost invisible.
Michael J. Heck, the former 8–52 pilot who refused to fly more bombing missions over North Vietnam after the Christmas pause, said here yesterday:
The chiefs of the four‐party Joint Military Commission today issued what it called an urgent appeal to the Communist and Saigon commands “to promptly issue orders” to halt any further fighting in South Vietnam. The extraordinary appeal was made as the third week of the cease‐fire ended with fighting still continuing in some places and showing signs of increasing in others. [Page 1, Column 1.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 16. (AP)—The United States protested to the Communist side today the shooting down an American helicopter on a peace‐keeping mission. One the five insured crewmen was reported in critical condition with burns.
The news from Laos and Cambodia is beginning to show distressing similarities to the diplomatic deadlock of December that delayed the Vietnam cease‐fire and provoked temporary intensification of the war.
JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Feb. 16 (UPI) — President Nixon praised the bravery of America's fighting men today and said that when a prisoner of war can retuarn after 6½ years with “God Bless America” on his lips, “it has all been worthwhile.”
MY THO, South Vietnam, Feb. 16—The two commissions to carry out and supervise the Vietnam cease‐fire maintain regional headquarters in this Mekong Delta town 40 miles south of Saigon, but they are inactive and almost invisible.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 16 (AP) — North Vietnam will release 20 more United States prisoners of war in Hanoi on Sunday, the Pentagon announced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 17—The chiefs of the four‐party. Joint Military Commission today made what they called an urgent appeal to the Communist and Saigon commands “to promptly issue orders” to halt any further fighting in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 16—The Nixon Administration has tentatively decided on a major shift of American ambassadors to key Asian posts in the wake of the Vietnam settlement, wellplaced sources in the Adminis tration and outside the Government said today.
A hearty meal of five eggs, six strips of bacon and a whole cherry pie à la mode was on the breakfast bill of fare yesterday for a Marine Corps pilot returning to the United States after six months in a Viet Cong prisoner‐of‐war camp in Vietnam.
City Council President San ford D. Garelik said yesterday that he had introduced a bill in the City Council to compel th?? Civil Service Commission to provide special examinations for Vietnam veterans who missed them because they were in the service.
FOR those who recognize that it is nations and not individuals that make war, Robert Bly's new book may be the best examination of our motives during the debacle in Vietnam. “Sleepers Joining Hands” looks at the dominion of chaos and death over recent American life and tries to discern its whole meaning, as if at last we have got far enough into it or beyond it to understand what happened, and as if we will not be devastated again by any more surprises.
WHEN a foreign policy has culminated in such a disaster as Vietnam, there is an irresistible temptation to contemplate what might have been. The obvious focus of such speculation is Adlai Stevenson, who, I believe, brought more honor to the Presidency in seeking the office than any who have since held it.
It is an ironic fact that those who call attention to a problem and insist that it be dealt with often end by being considered the problem themselves. Thus, the war in Vietnam might never have been halted had it not been for the political opposition of Americans who insisted to two Presidents that it was an unnecessary, unwinnable and immoral war; but in the end it was those same Americans who were consistently accused of having been the stumbling blocks on the way to “peace with honor.”
BALDWIN, L. I., Feb. 17—Mr. and Mrs. Paul F. Conte have announced the engagement of their daughter, Miss Carolyn Jean Conte, to Chief Warrant Officer/2 Brian B. Sheehy, an Army helicopter pilot who returned recently from Vietnam. He is the son of James J. Sheehy of Rockville Centre and the late Mrs. Frances K. Sheehy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 17 — The Government announced today the formation of a national political body to oppose the National Liberation Front in the coining political struggle in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 17 (UPI) —The first American, serviceman has been listed by the Pentagon as killed in action in Laos since the Vietnam ceasefire—which does not cover Laos—went into effect three weeks ago. He was First Lieut. Robert E. Bernhardt, son of Mr. and Mrs. Henry A. Bernhatdt of Richmond, Va., an Air. Force crewman in an EC‐47 electronic intelligence plane shot down Feb. 5 in southern Laos. Seven other crew members are missing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb., 18 — A Saigon military spokesman said yesterday that Government troops had been ordered to stop fighting in compliance with an urgent appeal issued earlier in the day by the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission.
DETROIT—In the fall of 1971 and the spring of 1972, Ford Motor Company engineers were testing engines for 1973 cars to see if they could meet the standards of the Federal Clean Air Act. The standards were tough and some of the engineers had a Better Idea about how to pass them: They tampered with the engines and didn't report the changes to the Environmental Protection Agency.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 17 (Reuters) — A vast wealth of Vietnamese antiques and artifacts buried and hidden away during the war may be revealed soon for the first time in 25 years.
SAIGON—The cease‐fire still had not taken hold in Vietnam last week, but thousands more Vietnamese prisonera of war were released to return to an uncertain future.
MADISON, Wis., Feb. 17 —A Wisconsin agency has treatened to drop its sponsorship of a National Young Americans award program unless it receives assurances that the Federal Bureau of Investigation does not screen its nominees.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 17—With the war officially over in South Vietnam, many of the leaders of a decade of protest in the United States are trying to define a place for themselves and their followers in a nation at peace.
To the Editor:
Under guard in an apartment at Fort Benning, Ga., First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. has waited for nearly two years as the Army pondered his role in the killing of perhaps 400 Vietnamese civilians in the hamlet of My Lai in March 5, 1968.
An Air Force jet arrived in Hanoi, North Vietnam, today to pick up 20 more American prisoners of war. The return of the 20 will bring the number of freed Anserican prisoners to 163, eight civilians and 155 servicemen. The remaining captives are to be released by March 29. Details on Page 5.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 17 — The South Vietnamese authorities warned newsmen here today that they could be shot for seeking to interview Communist representatives on the Joint Military Commission at their base at Tan Son Nhut Airport.
GARDEN CITY, L. L—Despite the cease‐fire in Vietnam and the scheduled release of prisoners that has already begun, members of the Long Island League of Families of Prisoners and Men Missing in Southeast Asia are expressing a fierce determination to stick together until the last man is either home or accounted for.
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif.—Capt. James Bond Stockdale returned to American soil last Week after more than seven years as a prisoner in North Vietnam. His hair was grayer than when he left, and a stiff leg dragged a bit as he stepped off an airplane here and thanked the waiting crowds for their loyalty.
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Feb. 17—As the first group of returning prisoners arrived on the American mainland here this week, a sketchy picture began to emerge of their years in captivity and their plans.
WASHINGTON — Henry A. Kissinger last week opened a new dialogue with the Hanoi Government designed as “the beginning of new bilateral relations” between the United States and North Vietnam.
CLARK AIR BASE, Philippines, Sunday, Feb. 18 (AP)—A United States Air Force C‐141 medical evacuation aircraft, which left here at noon today (11 P.M. Saturday New York time), has landed in Hanoi, North Vietnam, to pick up 20 more prisoners of war.
Lawyers and laymen alike think of Constitutional issues in terms of what the Supreme Court says and — for a generation at least — almost exclusively in terms of the Court's treatment of individual liberties and civil rights. Only rarely are we conscious that “in largest part the Constitution is not a charter of liberties but a blueprint for a federal system of government.” And when we are, it its a crisis — the Treaty of Versailles, F.D.R.'s court packing Or the Vietnam war—which has served to dramatize that fact.
HIS is Anthony Herbert's own story of his long love affair with the United States Army, a love affair that ended sadly in Vietnam in 1969 and turned to bitter anger and recrimination. Beginning with his boyhood in a western Pennsylvania coal town, the long autobiography details his exploits of slaughter of enemy soldiers in Korea and Vietnam, his rise in the Army from an ill‐educated private to a lieutenant colonel in charge of an infantry battalion with a master's degree in psychology, and ends with blow‐by‐blow account of his public feud with the Army he loved and claims to love still. If hell bath no fury like a woman scorned, it is no less true of this professional soldier.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 19. — The recent upsurge in fighting showed no signs of abating yesterday despite an urgent appeal by the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission for an immediate end to hostilities.
To the Editor: I note that the Vietnam, cease‐fire agreement contains the following language: “In pursuance of its traditional policy, the United States will contribute to healing the wounds of war arid to postwar reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and throughout Indochina.” Since the President's announcement of the agreement there has appeared in the press discussion, and in your newspaper endorsement, Of the future extension by the United States to North Vietnam of economic assistance of some $2.5 billion.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 18—A silent battle is under way in South Vietnam for the control of areas in which neither the Government nor the Communists can claim to exercise full authority. The weapons are people.
Senator Hubert H. Humphrey said here last night that the end of the war in Vietnam and the withdrawal of American forces from Indochina could lead to peace in the Middle East.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Feb. 18 (Agence France‐Presse)—Deputy Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach left today for Peking and Paris at the head of a mission of experts to take part in the international conference on Vietnam, scheduled to begin Feb. 26 in Paris.
“I saw him get off that plane and walk along that chow line, and he was smiling every moment of the way,” boomed Joseph McManus of Babylon, L.I., yesterday as he broke away from a champagne party toasting the return of his son from North Vietnamese captivity. “He looked like he could do five more years and eight months standing on his head.”
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Monday, Feb. 19 —Twenty American prisoners of, war arrived here last night from Hanoi, looking healthy, saluting the flag, and waving and smiling at a crowd of more than a thousand well‐wishers.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 18 —Legislation that would solve some difficult income‐tax problems for the families of servicemen who had been listed as missing in Vietnam, but who are now found to be dead, will be proposed shortly by the Nixon Administration.
President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam said in an interview broadcast yesterday that his country would need more economic aid from the United States in peace than in war. He said also that diplomatic relations with Hanoi could be established in the future.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 18—A Presidential message warning of ‘real despotism’ if one branch of the Federal Government assumes the powers of another, cautioning against an ‘overgrown’ military establishment and recommending a ‘stop’ to alliances with other nations will be read to Congress tomorrow.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 19. — The recent upsurge in fighting showed no signs of abating yesterday despite an urgent appeal by the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission for an immediate end to hostilities.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 18 (AP) —The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee said today that he would support President Nixon's proposal to rebuild North Vietnam if the President would agree to cut back on military spending abroad.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 18—The head of the American delegation to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission today asked the International Commission of Control and Supervision to investigate an incident last week in which an American helicopter was shot down and five crewmen were injured.
Senator James L. Buckley of New York, seeking to share the publicity being given returning Vietnam P.O.W.'s, toured St. Albans Naval Hospital in Queens the other day and used the occasion to issue a pronouncement against the granting of amnesty for draft resisters. To Mr. Buckley, general amnesty would be “morally objectionable and historically unprecedented.” He is wrong on both counts.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 20—Fighting in South Vietnam declined substantially during the last 24 hours, the Saigon military authorities reported today, leading to the belief that an urgent appeal by the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission to end all hostilities might be having some effect at last.
TOKYO, Tuesday, Feb. 20—Henry A. Kissinger arrived hen from China yesterday to confer with Premier Kakuei Tanaka about reconstruction in Indo china and policy toward Peking.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Feb. 19 — The first 163 American prisoners freed by the Communists in. Vietnam have come home to the theme of “God bless America,” and many officers at this base clearly believe that the returners' conduct has set the stage for restoration of unchallenged patriotism and of the status of the military man to his honored place. If so it will have been no accident but a result of careful military planning.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 19 (AP) — The United States command announced today the withdrawal of 1,564 more American soldiers from Vietnam, reducing the United States force to 14,180 men, the lowest in a decade.
Mrs. Gandhi and the U.S.
In a ceremony at City Hall Park yesterday a crab apple tree was planted and dedicated by members of Viva (Voices in Vital America) as a tribute to prisoners of war and men missing in action.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Feb. 19 — Six American war prisoners, freed yesterday in Hanoi, talked to newsmen here today about their thoughts in captivity, how they felt about being released, and their plans.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 20—Fighting in South Vietnam declined substantially during the last 24 hours, the Saigon military authorities reported today, leading to the belief that an urgent appeal by the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission to end all hostilities might be having some effect at last.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20—Following are excerpts from the White House transcript of President Nixon's speech today before a Joint session of the South Carolina Legislature in Columbia:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 21—After a one‐day decline in action, the level of fighting has risen sharply again, to around its highest point since the ceasefire began on Jan. 28, Saigon military authorities reported this morning.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20 (UPI) —The Senate approved yesterday a resolution calling for a monument to the Vietnam war dead of the First Infantry Division.
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Feb. 20 (UPI)—Eighteen former prisoners of war came home 20 minutes late today because they did a little sightseeing over the Golden Gate Bridge—their first sight of the United States mainland in more than five years.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20 (AP) — Seven United States Navy men and marines were taken Sunday on a closely guided tour of Haiphong, North Vietnam's principal port, the Pentagon said today.
Gov. George C. Wallace of Alabama is expected to be released from a Birmingham hospital this week, nearly a month after surgery to remove his prostate gland. Mr. Wallace will be returning home to Montgomery amid speculation that he is physically unable to function as Governor and still somewhat depressed about his condition.
PARIS, Feb. 20 (UPI) — A leading Vietcong official proposed today that high‐level talks to decide the political future of South Vietnam be held in a neutral zone in South Vietnam or in Paris.
ALBANY, Feb. 20—The Legislature today approved a $210.7‐million deficiency budget authorizing additional expenditures for the current fiscal year that were not anticipated when the 1972–73 budget was approved last April 1.
COLUMBIA, S. C., Feb. 20—President Nixon appealed today, in a 25‐minute address here, for public understanding of the motives for the settlement in Vietnam and its potential benefits.
COLUMBIA, S. C., Feb. 20—President Nixon appealed today, in a 25‐minute address here, for public understanding of the motives for the settlement in Vietnam and its potential benefits.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20—Senate leiders of both parties urged today that debate on American aid to North Vietnam be put off until United States troops and prisoners were safely out of Indochina.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20 (UPI) — Henry A. Kissinger returned to the United States today and went directly to the White House to report to President Nixon on his two‐week trip to North Vietnam, China and Japan.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Feb. 21—American and South Vietnamese officers said today that no one in the crucial central provinces of South Viennam had been ordered to stop fighting.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Thursday, Feb. 22—While the peace accord signed in Laos yesterday hears a strong family resemblance to the accord signed on Vietnam last month, the Communist side here seems to have won the lion's share of the bargain.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 21 —Secretary of State William P. Rogers hailed the Laotian ceasefire agreement today, but he expressed concern about the absence of a settlement in Cambodia so far.
Looking up seemed to be the best way to describe the state of United States‐Indian relations in New Delhi yesterday. To mark the arrival of Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the new American Ambassador, Air India placed a large billboard atop its downtown New Delhi office. The sign depicts Mr. Moynihan being kissed by the cartoon maharajah who serves, as the airline's symbol. And passers‐by raising their eyes read the inscription, “Oh Danny Boy You're Irish, Puckish, Controversial, Orthodox. Oh Danny Boy we're going to love you so.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 21 (AP) — In an attempt to attract private investment in its fledgling industries, South Vietnam's national bank announced today that the Government had authorized the nation's first stock exchange.
HONG KONG, Thursday, Feb. 22 (Reuters) — North Vietnam's National Assembly has unanimously approved the Vietnam peace agreement signed by Hanoi and Washington officials last month, the North Vietnamese news agency reported today.
"Lolly-Madonna XXX" is a disaster, but I can't tell whether it's because hillbillies make rotten metaphors or because Richard C. Sarafian has made a rotten movie. The film was photographed in the Tennessee hills, and its cast includes Rod Steiger, Robert Ryan, Jeff Bridges, Season Hubley and a lot of other people who play characters with names like Laban and Pap and Ludie and Seb and Lolly-Madonna.Its high-minded intention: to demonstrate the futility of war in terms of a feud between the Feather family and the Gutshalls, which begins with some fussing over a piece of land and climaxes in the sort of fighting in which people really get their heads blown off. I assume Mr. Sarafian and his screenwriters thought they were making a film about Vietnam without making a film about Vietnam, which is the weasel way of dealing with Great Issues.Had the story about the Feathers and the Gutshalls any dramatic or emotional intensity of its own, it wouldn't be necessary to mention Vietnam. But "Lolly-Madonna" is so absolutely spineless, it can't even be consistent about its characters, some of whom come straight out of old Esquire cartoons and some of whom are apparently sophisticated enough to argue scruples vs. jrinciples. The result is what W. C. Fields, describing a particularly ghastly mixture of free lunch ingredients, once called a moulage.Mr. Sarafian, the director of "The Vanishing Point" and "Man in the Wilderness," has done better things, as has the co-author, of the screenplay, Rodney Carr-Smith, who worked on "Bartleby." Perhaps the blame should be put on the editor—I don't know. I am sure, however, that "Lolly-Madonna" (which is a signature, not a film rating) opened yesterday at the 59th Street Twin East I Theater and it's indefensible on any level.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Thursday, Feb. 22—While the peace accord signed in Laos yesterday bears a strong family resemblance to the accord signed on Vietnam last month, the Communist side here seems to have won the lion's share of the‐bargain.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 22—American sources on the Joint Military Commission accused the North Vietnamese and Vietcong sides yesterday of stalling the first two field investigations of alleged ceasefire violations that the four‐party group has undertaken.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 21 —Senator George McGovern dedared today that he “cannot be at all sympathetic now” to proposals that the United States provide direct reconstruction aid to North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 21 —Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Communist party leader, has told President Nixon by letter that the Vietnam peace agreement creates “new possibilities” for improving Soviet‐American relations and the world situation.
Following is a transcript of Henry A. Kissinger's press briefing In Washington yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of A.B.C. News:
At the beginning of 1961 I was an eighth‐ grader in an all ‐ black high school in Charlotte, N., C. My father was living and my youngest brother was not yet born. None of my sisters had yet had any babies and none had dropped out of school. I had lost no friends to death in Vietnam and none had become addicts. We had a new Président, born of this generation and promising us — me that a new day had come. We were all happy then. Perhaps prematurely, so our friends told us, but we weft, happy.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 22—The American prisoners of war in North Vietnam maintained strong over‐all discipline and rapport, sources close to the prisoners report, but day‐to‐day camp life also included many serious personality disputes and some bitter divisions over the Vietnam war.
To the Editor: I am a resident of Rye. I have watched my fellow citizens of Rye behave in not untypical fashion, reacting toward the bridge much as a virgin about to be raped. Words like pollution, sullying, raping, and obscenity are used with rather indecent frequency in discussing the issue of the Rye bridge.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 22—The Kissinger‐Chou conversations in Peking have made progress mainly because the two men have been faithful to the agreement they made at the very beginning of their talks last year: “Get the principles straight first, and the practical problems can then be sorted out at leisure.”
The two fliers who are soon to be released from imprisonment in. China were both captured when their planes were shot down after straying over the North Vietnamese border.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 23 — President Nguyen Thieu said yesterday that he welcomed the truce in neighboring Laos.as “complementary to the cease‐fire in Vietnam.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 22—The American prisoners of war in North Vietnam maintained strong over‐all discipline and rapport, sources close to the prisoners report, but day‐to‐day camp life also included many serious personality disputes and some bitter divisions over the Vietnam war.
Democratic nations have never hesitated to let their heroes speak freely for themselves, whether in triumph or adversity. No public relations expert translated Vinegar Joe Stillwell's “hell of a licking” into a phrase more acceptable to the Government's delicate phrasemakers. The brave but beaten British soldiers returning from the beaches of Dunkirk did not have to run the gantlet of His Majesty's professional communicators, nor did those who emerged at the end of the war after four or five years' incarceration in prison camps. We do not recall that American prisoners coming home after any previous wars were told what they could and could not discuss even with their hometown press.
DETROIT, Feb. 23 (UPI) —A television news producer was dismissed yesterday for allegedly trying to sell videotaped television news broadcasts for $75 each to the families of Vietnam prisoners of war.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 23 (UPI) — Antiwar activists, unconvinced that the Vietnam ceasefire means the end of the war, said today they would picket the White House tomorrow demanding complete American withdrawal from Southeast Asia. The picket line, to be composed of members of the steering committee of the National Peace Action Coalition and local Washington peace groups, will be the first antiwar demonstration in Washington since the Vietnam accords were signed Jan. 27.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 23 (UPI) —The Army dropped courtmartial charges today in the case of a 23‐year‐old soldier who was captured by the Vietcong while his trial was pending in 1970 and was not released until Feb. 5.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 23—In a series of news conferences around the country, farmer American prisoners of war insisted today that the Vietnam war had succeeded and that their years in captivity had not been in vain.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 (UPI)—The United States command today reported the second American peacetime fatality in Vietnam. The victim, the flight engineer of an unarmed helicopter shot down near An Loc a week ago, died today at a hospital on Okinawa.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 24—President Nguyen Van Thieu asserted yesterday that North Vietnam planned to infiltrate “millions of people” into South Vietnam to shift the power balance in the elections called for in the Paris peace accords.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 23 (AP) —United States Navy ships and heicopters arrived off Haiphong harbor today to begin clearing thousands of underwater mines from North Vietnamese waters. Pentagon officials said that the clearing operations would get under way in a few days, probably on Monday.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 23—In a series of news conferences around the country, former American prisoners of war insisted today that the Vietnam war had succeeded and that their years in captivity had not been in vain.
MINNEAPOLIS, Feb. 23 (AP) —Vice President Agnew tonight described differences between the Nixon Administration and the press as “healthy.” calling them repetitions of similar differences in previous administrations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 (UPI)—United States troop strength in Vietnam dropped to 13,234 men today, the lowest figure in a decade.
DENVER, Feb. 23 (UPI)—Chief Warrant Officer 2d cl. Daniel F. Maslowski, 23 years old, his face thin after more than two years in jungle prison camps, said today that he had agreed to make radio broadcasts for his captors to let his family know he was alive and “to help end the war.”
To the Editor:
PARIS, Feb. 23—The Foreign Ministers of the Saigon Government and of the South Vietnamese Communists met alone today for the first time and finally agreed on when and where to start political talks between their regimes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23—Why do cease‐fire violations continue to take place so frequently almost a month after the fighting in Vietnam was supposed to stop? The traveler around South Vietnam finds many reasons, none of which will appear in communiqués or press conferences.
To the Editor: With regard to Fox Butterfield's article, “Who was this enemy? (Feb. 4), it should be mentioned that the lack of this kind of personalization of the enemy in the American press has made it difficult for the average American to see the individual realities behind the generalizations and abstractions concerning the Indochina conflict.
The press was portrayed yesterday as the noble adversary, the corrupted arm, the indispensable analyst and the sensational distorter of government.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 24 (AP) — Reports from the field said today that 12 South Vietnamese were killed and 10 were wounded when three shells were fired by Communist gunners into Tri Ton, a district capital in the Mekong Delta 125 miles southwest of Saigon. Four‐Party Joint Military Commission during the morning. A second shell hit a building being renovated for use by the International Commission of Control and Supervision. Later in the afternoon, another shell hit the district tactical operations center.
SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 24—Despite President Nixon's pledge that there will be no amnesty for draft resisters, a number of young Americans who fled to Canada and Europe to avoid military service during the Vietnam war will go unpunished because of breakdowns in the method of prosecuting them.
My associates and I had been planning this trip for more than six months, but we could never have hoped for a more auspicious start. The very day we landed in Budapest and entered Eastern Europe the Vietnam peace settlement was signed. On this most positive note began a fascinating, rewarding and exhausting visit to Hungary, Yugoslavia, Rumania and Poland.. In less than nine days we were to have some 50 meetings with officials of these four countries.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 24—President Nixon pledged his second Administration today to underwrite social programs that he said would “give people the assistance they need without taking away their freedom or decreasing their self‐reliance and their self‐respect.”
KONTUM, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 — The shelling has slackened, but the cease‐fire has brought few other changes for the better to this beleagured Highlands capital.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 24—South Vietnamese Government officials reportedly consider the nature and relatively low extent of the present fighting as being close to the best they can expect, and hope that the fighting will be frozen at a low level comparable to the period before United States and North Vietnamese ground forces raised it.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 24 —About 150 chanting demonstrators picketed in front of the White House today in the first antiwar protest since the Vietnam cease‐fire accords were signed Jan. 27. President Nixon was at his retreat at Camp David, and the demonstrators moved slowly in circles, bearing signs that proclaimed, “End Support of the Thieu Regime,” “No U.S.‐Imposed Regimes,” “U.S. Out Now.”
BAL HARBOUR, Fla., Feb. 24—The Executive Council of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations called today for a comprehensive new international trade and finance policy to halt the deterioration of America's position in the world economy.
OAKLAND, Calif., Feb. 24 (UPI)—The Oakland A's announced today that Navy Lieut. Cmdr. Everett Alvarez Jr., the first American pilot shot down over North Viet nam, would throw out the first ball on opening night April 6.
PARIS, Feb. 24 — Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Vietnam said today that the “unstated but real purpose” of the international conference on Vietnam opening here Monday was “to de‐Americanize the peace.”
CORONADO, Calif., Feb. 24 — Kirk Jenkins weeds gardens to make extra spending money, and he has been saving up for something special.
At least since President Johnson's speech at Johns Hopkins University in April, 1965, the United States has been committed to the economic reconstruction of Indochina, including North Vietnam, after the end of the war. Now it begins to appear that the Nixon Administration has a bear by the tail in its desire to fulfill this commitment.
To the Editor: Since Congress has shown itself so incapable of giving “we the people” indirect control over foreign policy, a spate of commentary has suggested that the time has come for serious reconsideration of the entire foreign policy mechanism in a democracy. The framers of the Constitution feared giving us complete direct control over national policy, in that representatives the Senate were appointed ed by the legislatures, and not elected. Eventually that flaw in our democracy was corrected.
WASHINGTON—Ever since Senator Gerald Nye's investigating committee turned the spotlight in the 1930's on “the merchants of death” — the world's munitions makers—the United States has vacillated on whether it should provide arms to foreign countries.
MOSCOW, Feb. 24 — The Soviet Union has sharply toned down its denunciations of China in the last two weeks, evidently in preparation for Monday's international conference on Vietnam in Paris.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 123 (AP) — Ronald Nessen, newsman for the National Broadcasting Company, was informed today that his visa would not be renewed and that he would be denied any future entry visa to South Vietnam.
In his speech to the South Carolina Legislature last week, President Nixon said that with the end of the American involvement in Vietnam, “The critical question is: How do we end a war and then go on from there to build a peace?”
SAIGON—Perhaps it was too much to hope that after a quarter century of carnage the Vietnamese foes would break clean like prizefighters and return to their corners to await the bell for the next round.
WASHINGTON—Shortly after the signing of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement last month, Henry A. Kissinger told a newsman that he thought the first tangible “peace dividend” would be an improvement in relations with China. Last Thursday, following several days of talks between Mr. Kissinger and Mao Tse‐tung and other Chinese officials in Peking, the “dividend” was declared.
LOS ANGELES, Feb. 25 —American officials believe that the list of prisoners supplied by the Communists in Indochina may not be complete.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25—Samuel A. Adams is a direct descendant of his colonial namesakes, a Harvard man and an official of the Central Intel. ligence Agency who was once in charge of estimating the strength of Vietcong units in South Vietnam.
The Senate Armed Services Committee has received classified documents that Lieut. Col. Anthony B. Herbert says prove his contention that the Army was determined to oust him after he spoke out about alleged atrocities in Vietnam.
To the Editor:
PARIS, Feb. 25—Secretary of State William P. Rogers began private talks tonight with Foreign Minister phi Peng‐fei of China on settling each country's financial claims against the other, and set up a meeting later this week with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 26 (AP)—The United States command an nounced today that the withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam was slightly more than 50 per cent completed at the halfway mark of the 60‐day deadline set for withdrawal and prisoner release.
BINH THANH, South Vietnam, Feb. 24—The Government is requiring villagers here to fill out declarations of loyalty that will be presented to an international truce‐keeping body as evidence of the Government's control of the population.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 —Samuel A. Adams Is a direct descendant of his colonial namesakes, a Harvard man and an official of the Central Intelligence. Agency who was once in charge of estimating the strength of Vietcong units in South Vietnam.
LOS ANGELES, Feb. 25 —When Capt. John Nasmyth Jr. landed last week after years of captivity, a dozen strangers rushed up to him and thrust into his hands metal bracelets bearing his name.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 26 (AP)—The South Vietnamese delegation to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission charged today that North Vietnam moved Sovietbuilt SAM‐2 missile batteries into Quangtri Province after the cease‐fire began, in violation of the peace agreement. The province is just below the demilitarized zone; which straddles the border between the two Vietnams:
LONDON, Feb. 25—As the foreign, ministers assembled in Paris for the international conference on Vietnam, Tran Va Lam of Saigon made a comment that for once could win general agreement. The unstated purpose of the meeting, he said, was “to deAmericanize the peace.”
DA NANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 25—Mobs of demonstrators threw rocks at the barracks of North Vietnamese members of the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission here and in Hue today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 UPI)—President Nixon participated in a prayer of thanks at a White House worship service today to observe “the first time in nine years the United States is at peace.”
DA NANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 25—Mobs of demonstrators threw rocks at the bar racks of North Vietnamese members of the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission here and in Hue today.
KOSCIUSKO, Miss., Feb. 26 (AP)—James C. Bailey, father of a recently freed prisoner of war, died yesterday. He was 75 years old.
MOSCOW, Feb. 26 (UPI)—Izvestia accused the Pentagon today of brainwashing released United States prisoners of war and said the prisoners in turn brainwashed the American public about the Vietnam war. “If one puts aside the emotions and touching scenes of family reunions, one feels at once the director's guiding hand—a giant propaganda and psychological campaign prepared by the Pentagon,” the Government newspaper said.
TOKYO, Feb. 26—The secretary general of Japan's governing Liberal‐Democratic party denounced the world's major powers today for excluding Japan from important international councils, including the conference on Vietnam that opened in Paris today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 26—Premier. Golda Meir of Israel arrived here today for a 10‐day visit to the United States and said it was “high tithe” that there be a serious movement toward a peace settlement in the Middle East.
When William Cisco came home from serving in Vietnam with the Marines, the only work he could get was waxing floors Even then, the maintenance company soon laid him off.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 26 (UPI) — The Joint Chiefs of Staff on occasion recommended a South Vietnamese invasion of North Vietnam, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer said in testimony made public today.
PARIS, Feb. 26—The international conference On Vietnam opened today with a proposal by Canada for a forum that could act on any future breakdawn of the cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 27—A Nort Vietnamese spokesman declared today that there would be no further release of American prisoners of war “until the United States stops concentrating their efforts on getting back prisoners while failing to correctly implement the Paris agreement.”
LONDON—The United States has just succeeded in terminating—so far as itself is concerned—the most humiliating war not merely in its own history but in that of most Western nations in modern times. It is comparable with the defeat of Russia by Japan in 1905, and much more ignominious than that of France in Algeria. One of the peculiar features is that the American Govermnent knew by 1967 that they had lost, and admitted as much publicly in 1968. Yet though they fought for over five years to extricate themselvei, as against a bare two years under the impression that they could win, the question still remains: Will they ever know what hit them?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 26—Gen. Duong Van Minh, a political rival of President Nguyen Van Thieu, criticized the Thieu Government today for failing to restore civil and political liberties guaranteed by the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
SYDNEY, Australia, Feb. 26 —Australia and North Vietnam, former adversaries in the Vietnam war, established diplomatic relations today.
OKLAHOMA CITY, Feb. 26—Antiwar demonstrators in the United States prolonged the Vietnam war and the release of American prisoners for from one to two years, a senior Air Force P.O.W. who was among the first to be released said here tonight.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Tuesday, Feb. 27 (UPI)—Cambodian‐Communist forces overran two major Government positions on Route 2 before dawn ttoday after more than 24 hours of fierce fighting, the Cambodian high command reported.
PARIS, Feb. 26 (UPI)—Led by Chi Peng‐fei, Peking's Foreign Minister, scores of Chinese officials, aides, interpreters and journalists are attending the international conference on Vietnam.
SAIGON South Vietnam, Feb. 26 (AP)—Thich Tinh Khiet, supreme patriarch of South Vietnam's Buddhists, died yesterday in Hue. He was 84 years old.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 26 — The overriding reality of Vietnam, a month after the ostensible arrival of peace, is that virtually nothing has changed.
TOKYO, Feb. 26—The secretary general of Japan's governing Liberal‐Democritic party denounced the world's major powers today for excluding Japan from important international councils, including the conference on Vietnam that opened in Paris today.
WASHINGTON, Feb, 26—What the country needs now at the end of the Vietnam war is not amnesty but amnesia.
When William Cisco came home from serving in Vietnam with the Marines, the only work he could get was waxing floors. Even then, the maintenance company soon laid him off.
PARIS, Feb. 27 — Secretary of State William P. Rogers was ordered by the White House tonight to give “highest priority” to seeking an early meeting with the North Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Duy Trinh, to demand an explanation for the delay in Hanoi's release of further American prisoners of war.
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE Calif., Feb. 27 (AP)—A former prisoner of war acknowledged today that he made statements over the Hanoi radio urging Congress to end the war.
The Administration reacted sharply yesterday and accused Hanoi of violating major provisions of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement by delaying the release of American prisoners of war. President Nixon ordered Secretary of State William P. Rogers at the Vietnam peace conference in Paris “to demand clarification” from the North Vietnamese delegation “on the most urgent basis.” [Page 1, Column 8.] Statements by the United States and North Vietnamese delegations, and the White House press secretary are on Page 10.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 28—A North Vietnamese spokesman said toay that “both sides must take ositive steps” to end an imasse on the release of more united States prisoners of war. Col. Bui Tin, a spokesman for the North Vietnamese delegaion to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission, said his delegation would discuss its feasons for delaying the further release of prisoners at a meetthis morning of the comliission's chief delegates.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27 — The American troops in Vietnam are now down to about 11,000 and the prisoners, despite some delays, are coming home; but nothing has yet been done about the orphans of the storm, and particularly about the children fathered and then abandoned in Vietnam by American servicemen.
PARIS, Feb. 27 — Secretary of State William P. Rogers wasordered by the White House tonight to give “highest priority” to seeking an early meeting with the. North Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Duy Trinh, to demand an explanation for the delay in Hanoi's release of further Amer ican prisoners of war.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27—The senate subcommittee on refugees reported today that more than 200,000 South Vietnamese civilians were made homeless during the first three weeks of the Vietnam cease‐fire, the highest refugee rate since the weeks following North Vietnam's offensive last April.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27—The Nixon Administration accused Hanoi today of violating major provisions of the Vietnam accords by delaying the release of American prisoners of war.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27 (Reuters)—The Defense Department said today that it was ready to begin sweeping mines from North Vietnamese waters, but that Hanoi had requested a delay so that fishermen could be warned to stay clear.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 27—A month after the signing of the Vietnam peace agreement the balance sheet on it is heavily weighted with failure.
NEWTON, Mass., Feb. 27 (AP)—The Massachusetts state board of Americans for Democratic Action approved a resolution last night protesting Senator George McGovern's oppoqition to economic aid for North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27—The Nixon Administration accused Hanoi today of violating major provisions of the Vietnam accords by delaying the release of American prisoners of war.
Following are excerpts from a North Vietnamese statement on the cease‐fire and prisoner releases issued by Hanoi's delegation in Saigon yesterday and the text of a United States response there, both distributed by The Associated Press, and excerpts from a news briefing yesterday by Ronald L. Ziegler, the White House press secretary:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 27—A month after the signing of the Vietnam peace agreement the balance sheet on it is heavily weighted with failure.
One month after the ink is dry the imprecisions of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreements are starting to confound the signatories.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—The wives of prominent politicians, businessmen and academicians have always had a delicate role to play in both public and private life. Wives in South Vietnam are adept at this. But living through a quarter‐century of war has taught them to be independent and resourceful, and they have become a powerful breed in their own right.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 28 (AP) — Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, now United States commander in Vietnam, was named today to become commander in chief of all Army_ forces in the Pacific.
ITHACA, N. Y., Feb. 28—Cornell University has made what may be the largest single acquisition of Vietnamese books and documents, university officials announced today.
LOS ANGELES, Feb, 28 (UPI) —Willian O. Woolridge, the former first sergeant major of the Army, and two co‐defendants pleaded guilty today to criminal charges in connection with the operation of servicemen's clubs in Vietnam.
ALBANY, Feb. 28—A con??tion between supporters and opponents of the war in Vietnam took place in the Assembly today over a resolution honoring the veterans of that war.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 28—James R. Schlesinger, the new Director of Central Intelligence, has named William E. Colby, former head of the American pacification program in South Vietnam and a long‐time intelligence operative, as director of clandestine operations.
PARIS, Feb. 28—The United States and North Vietnam, through some intricate diplomatic maneuvering today, seemed to ease the crisis over the delay in American prisoner releases and to pave the way for concluding the international conference on Vietnam Friday.
The first month of “cease‐fire” in South Vietnam has not been gratifying for anyone, except for the release of the first group of American prisoners. Fighting continues at unacceptable levels, international control is nowhere really in evidence, and not even a beginning has been made on the longerrange question of the political development of Vietnam.
DA NANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 28 — An unarmed American military helicopter carrying a Canadian and an Indonesian member of the International Commission of Control and Supervision was hit by small‐arms fire today 12 miles south of here. The American pilot was severely wounded in a leg.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 28—The United States started to sweep Haiphong harbor of mines yesterday and then, abruptly, stopped all operations and moved its mine‐clearing task force to sea, according to wellplaced Defense Department sources.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March I—The chief delegates to the four‐party Joint Military Commission met in Saigon today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 28 (Reuters)—The American bombing of North Vietnam last December cost more than $25‐million a day but was so precise that Hanoi residents felt it safe to come out and watch the attacks on military targets, a Defense Department official said today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 28—The White House said today that North Vietnam had given new assurances that all American prisoners of war would be released within the 60‐day period agreed to last month.
PARIS, March 1—The international conference on Vietnam completed its work today, and 12 foreign ministers initialed an agreement providing a means to call the conference back into session if the cease‐fire breaks down. The document is to be signed tomorrow.
WASHINGTON, March 1—Douglas K. Ramsey, a 38‐year‐old Foreign Service officer who spent seven years in Vietcong captivity, told today of forced marches, isolation, bed‐beri, malaria, meals of monkey, dog and bear meat, crude cages, shackles, chains and the jungle burial of a fellow prisoner.
International endorsement of the Vietnam peace agreements and the rapid resolution of the block on releasing American war prisoners are reassuring signs that North Vietnam, as well as the United States, continue to regard the Jan. 27 cease‐fire arrangements as serving their best national interests.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fridaf, March 2—Delegates of the Joint Military Commission met today and the Vietcong turned over to United States delegates the names of 27 American military prisoners and seven civilians who are to be released this weekend.
PARIS, March 1—Secretary General Waldheim said today that he had discussed the possibility of a Vietcong liaison office at United Nations Headquarters and that Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh had said her Provisional Revolutionary Government favored opening one.
To the Editor:
PARIS, March 1—The international conference on Vietnam completed its work today, and 12 foreign ministers initialed an agreement providing a means to call the conference back into session if the cease‐fire breaks down. The document is to be signed tomorrow.
Twelve foreign ministers signed in Paris yesterday a formal declaration endorsing the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement. An article on the ceremony and the text of the declaration appear on Page 6.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, March 3 — The effort to set up peace‐keeping machinery in South Vietnam appears to have suffered a setback yesterday when the Communists pulled out their truce delegates from the northern part of the country.
Twelve foreign ministers signed in Paris yesterday a formal declaration endorsing the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement. An article on the ceremony and the text of the declaration appear on page 6.
WASHINGTON, March 2—President Nixon promised today that postwar aid to North Vietnam, if approved by Congress, would be financed from existing defense and foreign aid funds, not from further slashes in “the domestic side of the budget.”
LOS ANGELES, March 2—Representative Paul N. McCloskey testified today that disclosure of one of the vol umes of the Pentagon paper “could not have been used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of a for eign nation.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 2—A group of recently released political prisoners, reportedly spirited into Saigon secretly, described today how they were beaten, tortured and ultimately crippled during years of confinement at the Government's island prison on Con Son.
SAIGON, March 2 (UPI)—South Vietnam “will be forced to deal severely with foreign journalists who deliberately violate our rules and regulations,” a Government spokesman said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam March 2 (Reuters)—A Saigon newspaper reported today that it had been fined one million piasters, or about $2,300, for contravening the Government's press laws.
PARIS, March 2—The United States, the Soviet Union, China and nine other parties—includ?? the opposing Vietnamese ??—joined today in signing ?? formal declaration obliging ?? to respect the Vietnam ?? fire agreement strictly and do nothing to upset it.
WASHINGTON, March 2—Following is the White House transcript of Press dent Nixon's news conference today
PARIS, March 2 (Reuters) —Following is the text of the declaration of the international conference on Vietnam signed here today:
PARIS, March 2—Although the prisoner crisis drew most attention, the most interesting development at the international conference on Vietnam was evidence of, a subtle shift in Hanoi's attitude toward the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, March 3 — The effort to set up peace‐keeping machinery in South Vietnam appears to have suffered a setback yesterday when the Communists pulled out their truce delegates from the northern part of the country.
WASHINGTON, March 2—President Nixon promised today that postwar aid to North Vietnam, if approved by Congress, would be financed from existing defense and foreign aid funds, not from further slashes in “the domestic side of the budget.”
PARIS, March 2—After the twelve foreign ministers put their initials to the document, Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh of the Provisional Revolutionary Government gave a reception at the Hotel George V. A white‐ gloved attendant announced the guests. Russians sipped champagne with Chinese. Americans chatted with Vietnamese revolutionaries, North and South.
LOS ANGELES, March 1 —For the last four years, the prisoners of war have played a leading role in the bitter national debate over Vietnam. And as they return from captivity, they remain the focus of deep and angry divisions that have not been obliterated by their homecoming. The prisoners are a “touchy subject” because even the most outspoken war critics feel sympathy for them as human beings and rejoice at their reunions with their families.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam—They live in a former prisoner of war camp on an isolated rise overlooking the Pleiku airfield, nearly 5,000 hill tribespeople who fled from the Communists last spring.
PARIS—The international conference to endorse the Vietnam ceasefire wound up in solemn diplomatic ceremony right on schedule last week, another milestone on the long and tortuous road to peace. But as has so often happened in Vietnamese affairs, nothing was quite what it was planned or seemed to be.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., March 3—A medical team including four physicians will leave tomorrow for North Vietnam on a week‐long survey of the country's postwar rehabilitation needs, according to qualified sources here.
WASHINGTON, March 3—The Federal Government, the Veterans Administration in particular, has failed to meet the problems of returning Vietnam veterans because of the V.A.'s orientation toward older veterans, a Ralph Nader report charged today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 3 (Reuters)—The United States today proposed another joint appeal for a halt to hostilities in South Vietnam.
To the Editor:
PARIS, March 3—Key American and North Vietnamese officials plan to hold private talks in the next few days on details of the establishment of a joint economic commission, which would play a major role in channeling United States aid to North Vietnam, well‐placed diplomatic sources said today.
LOS ANGELES, March 3—One man did sitting up exercises for four straight hours. Another made bracelets and rosaries from bits of rock and wood. Some prayed, or wrote poetry or worked out complex mathematics in their heads. Most studied new subjects ranging from auto mechanics to psychology. All became experts at stretching out even the smallest task, such as folding a blanket or chewing a piece of bread. In these ways, the American prisoners of war fought their fiercest enemy, time—time and such factors as isolation, boredom and
CLARK AIR BASE, the Phillippines, Sunday, March 4 —North Vietnam today released a third group of American military prisoners of war.
WASHINGTON, March 3 (UPI) — Sammy Davis Jr. suggested to President Nixon tonight that entertainers stage a gala honoring returning prisoners of war and give the proceeds to the families of servicemen who died in the Indochina war.
The Paris Indochina conference has neither added nor detracted from the possibility that one day real peace will descend upon Vietnam. Its importance is probably only that it took place, not that it accomplished anything of substance to enhance the settlement terms already accepted by the warring parties.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 3 (Agence FrancePresse) — The Long Bien Bridge across the Red River was reopened to road and rail traffic today, two months and three days after the end of the heaviest American bombing.
ORLANDO, Fla., March 3—Brian (Bud) Allin, who served in Vietnam as an Army artillery officer, was right on target today. With a third round of 67 in the Citrus open tournament, the 135‐pounder equaled the 1973 pro golf tour's 54‐hole scoring mark of 198.
SAN RAFAEL, Calif., March 3 (AP) — Janice Blair Arnheiter has withdrawn a divorce suit against her husband, Lieut. Comdr. Marcus Arnheiter of the Navy, retired. She said Tuesday that she filed the suit in a period of depression after publication of “The Arnheiter Affair” by Neil Sheehan, a book about the officer's removal from command of a destroyer escort off Vietnam seven years ago.
A preliminary investigation has reported that 4,000 veterans who served during the period of the war in Vietnam are on the city's relief rolls, Mrs. Eleanor Holmes Norton, chairman of the City Commission on Human Rights, said yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 5—A major provision of the Vietnam peace agreement has been virtually written off as no longer possible to carry out, according to well‐informed sources here.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Monday, March 5—Thirty‐four American and foreign prisoners of war were released by the Vietcong in Hanoi today and flown to Clark Air Base, marking the midpoint of prisoner releases scheduled to be completed by March 28 under the Paris cease‐fire accord.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, March, 4 (AP)——Colhdr. Richard A. Stratton was a prisoner in North Vietnam for six years and captivity made him a famous and controversial figure.
ORLANDO, Fla., March 4—Brian (Bud) Allin, a 28‐year‐old golf professional and Vietnam war veteran, smashed five 1973 Professional Golfers' Association tour records today in winning the $150,000 Florida Citrus open by 8 strokes with a 23‐under‐par total of 265.
Seven out of ten adults surveyed opposed unconditional amnesty for young men who left the country to avoid military service in Vietnam, according to the latest Gallup Poll on the subject.
PARIS, March 4—A South Vietnamese neutralist who fled to Paris years ago to avoid arrest by the Thieu Government is now planning to go home. During the International Conference here last week he met some Saigon officials and asked whether he could return safely. Of, course, they said: It was time for national reconciliation, and they wanted him home.
WASHINGTON, March 4 (AP) —The United States resumed the withdrawal of American troops from South Vietnam today and moved a naval minesweeping force back into position off Haiphong.
There were tears and laughter in the Linden, N. J., home of Mr. and Mrs. John B. Coker yesterday as their son, Lieut. George T. Coker, began his long journey home from the Vietnam war.
To the Editor,
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 5 (Agence FrancePresse)—Gia Lam Airport today experienced an unusual occurrence as American military personnel bought souvenirs in the arrival‐departure hall while waiting to pick up prisoners of war who were being released.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 5 — Highly placed American officials said today that North Vietnamese troops had hurriedly rebuilt the old United States Marine airstrip at Khe Sanh and begun using it for courier flights into South Vietnam in violation of the Paris cease‐fire agreement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 5 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese Government announced today that it would allow foreign newspapermen weekly access to North Vietnamese and Vietcong delegates to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission at their closely guarded compound on Tan Son Nhut air base.
ALAMEDA, Calif., March 5 (AP—The attack carrier U.S.S. Midway sailed under the Golden Gate Bridge Saturday to end an 11‐month Vietnam tour.
Mrs. Roberto Clemente filed a $5‐million negligence suit in connection with the plane crash off Puerto Rico on Dec. 31 that killed her husband, a star baseball player for the Pittsburgh Pirates. Mrs. Clemente and her three sons charged negli gence against the McDonnelDouglass Corporation, which made the plane, a DC‐7, and the Curtiss‐Wright Corpora tion, which made the plane's engines. The suit was filed in United States District Court, Manhattan.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, March 6—A North Vietnamese official said yesterday that the Communists would boycott further meetings of the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission because of a dispute over the exchange of Vietnamese war prisoners.
WASHINGTON, March 5 (UPI) —The American Legion disputed today Ralph Nader's charge that Vietnam veterans were being short‐changed because the Veterans Administration is “overwhelmingly oriented to the problems of older veterans who dominate the veterans' lobby.” In a statement, its National Commander, Joe L. Matthews, said that among its membership of 23 million, there were 450,000 Vietnam veterans and that the legion was “totally committed” to re‐evaluating and improving veterans' benefits “to keep pace with changing conditions.”
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, March 5—“When I was told on the airplane that I might make a short speech, the first thing I thought of was to add up the years of captivity that the men in this group had served. I stopped counting at 150. It's over that —150 years for 34 people is a long time. But there is no sorrow in this group today. Note whatsoever. I think right now that this is the happiest group of men in the United States or anywhere else in the world.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, March 6 — A North Vietnamese official said yesterday that the Communists would boycott further meetings of the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission because of a dispute over the exchange of Vietnamese war prisoners.
DOWNSVIEW, Ontario, Canada —The way Americans define the causes of the Indochina debacle will determine whether they shall be intellectually prepared to anticipate future crises. Conventional wisdom still attributes America's role in Vietnam to accidents or bureaucratic myopia, thereby slighting the real meaning of the consistency of American interventions in the Third World, in suppressing radical forces and preserving semicolonial societies.
WASHINGTON, March 5 —Two top Defense Department officials, in separate forums, warned North Vietnam today that it would be advised to live up to cease‐fire agreements in South Vietnam and Laos if it expects to receive reconstruction aid from the United States.
WASHINGTON, March 5—Some of the senior American pilots agreed—while still prisoners of war in Hanoi—to set up acorporation to manage income ncome from publishing, speech‐making and other public appearances upon their return, sources close to the prisoners have disclosed.
LOS ANGELES, March 5—The judge in the Pentagon papers trial ruled out today the “justification defense,” under which the defendants would have argued that the motivation for disclosing the secret study of United States involvement in Vietnam was to get information to Congress.
DA NANG, South Vietnam, March 1 — For Nguyen So, the cease‐fire has not come. He said he heard it was to happen on a Sunday around Tet, the Lunar New Year, but on that day he heard shells explode at the airfield. He guesses it was just another rumor.
MOSCOW, March 5 (UPI)—Six Soviet ships blocked in Haiphong Harbor since last May by American mines sailed out over the weekend, the Soviet press agency Tass said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 5 — Highly placed American officials said today that North Vietnamese troops had hurriedly rebuilt the old United States Marine airstrip at Khe Sanh and begun using it for courier flights into South Vietnam in violation of the Paris cease‐fire agreement.
The Columbia Broadcasting System yesterday postponed indefinitely the telecast scheduled for Friday night of Joseph Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival production of “Sticks and Bones,” a bitter drama about a blinded Vietnam veteran's homecoming.
Confidence in the stability and viability of the international monetary system has been badly shaken by the events of recent weeks. But the immediate crisis represents the culmination of a long deterioration of faith in the monetary system that has been going on for years—at least since the American escalation of the Vietnam war, the outbreak of inflation, the worsening United States balance of payments and the weakening of the dollar, the keystone of the system.
A telecast of “Sticks and Bones,” produced by Joseph Papp, has been postponed indefinitely by C.B.S. It said that the play, about the homecoming of a blinded Vietnam veteran, “might be unnecessarily abrasive... at a time when, prisoners of war and other” veterans” were returning home. Details, Page 87.
LOS ANGELES, March 6—A Central intelligence Agency analyst testified today at the Pentagon papers trial that he had attended conferences, in Saigon and Hawaii and at the agency, in which the military purposely diminished estimates of enemy strength in Vietnam.
A telecast of “Sticks and Bones,” produced by Joseph Papp, has been postponed indefinitely by C.B.S. It said that the play, about the homecoming of a blinded Vietnam veteran, “might be unnecessarily abrasive ... at a time when prisoners of war and other veterans” were returning home. Details, Page 87.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, March 7—Communist delegates to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission attended a commission meeting this morning after having threatened to boycott most of the meetings.
PENSACOLA, Fla., March 6 (UPI)—United States District Judge Winston Arnow denied defense motions today to dismiss charges that seven members of Vietnam Veterans Against the War and one supporter had conspired to bomb the Republican National Convention last summer.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, March 7—An impasse on the exchange of Vietnamese prisoners of war was broken today with what appeared to be a South Vietnamese compromise.
WASHINGTON, March 6 (Reuters)—Vice President Agnew accused the news media tonight of blowing out of proportion the issue of amnesty for those who refused to serve in the United States forces in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, March 6 (AP) —The House killed today a move to require the Pentagon to furnish detailed information on the intensive December bombing of North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, March 6 (AP) —Secretary of State William P. Rogers told the House Foreign Affairs Committee today that he was confident, peace could be maintained in Vietnam, but he said that prospects for a political settlement were questionable.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Match 6 — Secretary General Waldheim denied today that he had in any way felt slighted by what had been characterized in Paris as his “shabby” treatment at the Vietnam peace conference.
LOS ANGELES, March 6—A Central Intelligence Agency analyst testified today at the Pentagon, papers trial that he had attended conferences, in Saigon and Hawaii And at the agency, in which the military purposely diminished estimates of enemy strength in Vietnam.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 6 (Agence France‐Presse) —President Lon Nol said today that Cambodia was prepared to hold discussions in Phnom Penh or elsewhere with representatives of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces on the withdrawal of foreign troops from Cambodia and the exchange of prisoners.
AUSTIN, Tex, March 6 (UPI) —The Texas, Senate went on record today as being overwhelmingly opposed to any reconstruction money for North or South Vietnam as long as fighting continues there.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 6 (AP)—The Vietcong peace‐keeping delegation issued a blanket invitation today for foreign newsmen to meet with Communist officials.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Wednesday March 7 (AP)—Tvienty American former prisoners of war took off this morning for the United States.
DA NANG, South Vietnam, March 7—Many tens of thousands of nonexistent refugees from Quang Tri Province are being fed at American expense. American and Vietnamese officials close to the problem agree that cheating and corruption at all levels of involvement — from refugees getting an extra pound or two of rice a day to high Government officials in the upper reaches of a kickback pyramid —exceed previous, experience, however rich.
ANNAPOLIS, Md., March 7 (UPI) — A resolution was submitted to the Maryland General Assembly yesterday, declaring Jane Fonda, the actress, “persona non grata” because of her antiwar sentiments and calling or a boycott of her movies. There were no objections.
LOS ANGELES, March 7—The Government attempted today at the Pentagon papers trial to shore up the accuracy of the Army's estimates of enemy troop strength in Vietnam end at the same time to discredit a Central Intelligence Agency analyst who challenged those estimates.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 8—The South Vietnamese and the Communists began their second round, of prisoner exchanges this morning near the ruins of Quang Tri city after a bitter dispute that disrupted the work of the FourParty Joint Military Commission.
DA NANG, South Vietnam, March 1—Many tens of thousands of nonexistent refugees from Quang Tri Province are being fed at American expense. Amprican and Vietnamese officials close to the problem agree that cheating and corruption at all levels of involvement — from refugees getting an extra pound or two of rice a day to high Government officials in the upper reaches of a kickback pyramid —exceed previous, experience, however rich.
OTTAWA, March 7 — The question whether Canada should keep the 250 military observers she has in Vietnam is so politically explosive at home that Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau is sending Mitchell W. Sharp, the External Affairs Minister, to Saigon and Hanoi urgent talks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 7—An American journalist was ordered expelled from South Vietnam today and a South Vietnamese official said the Government was considering similar action against several other newsmen.
Eighty more freed prisoners of war arrived back in the United States yesterday, returning to military bases across the country for reunions with their loved ones.
This semiofficial glossary was assembled by the United States Air Force from information supplied by families of prisoners in North Vietnam to acquaint the returning P.O.W.'s with slang expressions now used in America.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 7 (UPI)—The United States Army will officially cease operations in Vietnam on March 15, ending nearly eight years of involvement in the country. The 6,000 remaining American troops will be under the command of the Military Assistance Command in Vietnam.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 7—The United States has been trying to bring about a change in Cambodia's leadership to halt the nation's decline under pressure from Vietnamese Communists and Cambodian guerrillas, but the effort has apparently been set back by the Government's strongman, the President's brother.
YANUCA ISLAND, Fiji—The strategic balance of the western and southwestern Pacific has been significantly altered by U.S. military withdrawals taking place in Okinawa and South Vietnam and the political balance, there really is one, may be changed by the new attitudes of recently elected socialist governments in Australia and New Zealand.
WASHINGTON, March 8—The United States and North Vietnam announced today that the first meeting of the new joint commission to discuss future economic relations between the two countries, including possible American aid for reconstruction, would take place in Paris a week from today.
WASHINGTON, March 8—The Defense Department said today that it had yet to find and recover or to explode any mines after two days of minesweeping in Haiphong Harbor and in the Gulf of Tonkin.
To the Editor:
Five released prisoners of war landed at Kennedy International Airport last evening for joyous reunions. Two others were greeted by a crowd of 2,000 at Fort Monmouth, N. J.
ALAMEDA Calif. March 8 (AP) — The Coral Sea will be the first attack carrier deployed to the Western Pacific since the Vietnam cease‐fire when she sails tomorrow, the Navy says.
The American Civil Liberties Union yesterday branded as “corporate cowardice” the Columbia Broadcasting System's decision to postpone the telecast of “Sticks and Bones,” David Rabe's antiwar play that had been scheduled for 9 tonight.
SACRAMENTO, Calif., March 8 (UPI)—A career Air Force officer who was a North Vietnamese prisoner says the United States butted its “nose into somebody else's business” and that President Nixon could have settled the war for the same terms four years ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 8 (Reuters)—South Vietnam released 500 Communist prisoners of war to the North today, but one of them, a North Vietnamese corporal, refused to cross the border and decided to remain in the South.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 8 — The Government elaborated today on its charges against an American correspondent who has been ordered expelled from South Vietnam.
Tonight at 9, “Sticks and Bones,” David Ralie's prizewinning play about a blind Vietnam veteran in combat with his All‐American family, will not be seen on the Columbia Broadcasting System.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, March 10 (Reuters) —Canada sharply criticized the two Communist members of the International Commission for Control and Supervision of the Vietnam ceasefire today for failing to investigate allegations that the North Vietnamese had set up missile sites at Khe Sanh in South Vietnam.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 8 — The United States has come to a critical juncture in its relationship with Cambodia. In the only country in Indochina that remains fully at war and where American planes carry out daily bombing raids, its policy has been stalemated by both “friend” and “foe.” North Vietnam has dashed American hopes that it will extend to Cambodia the scaling down of the war in South Vietnam and Laos.
CLEVELAND, March 9 (AP) —Witnesses at a hearing on problems of Vietnam veterans testified here today that benefits in the G. I. bill of rights were inadequate, that jobs were limited and that veterans with drug problems were trapped by a contradiction.
LOS ANGELES, March 9—McGeorge Bundy, one of the architects of America's Vietnam war policy, testified today that disclosure of three of the documents in the Pentagon papers case had not damaged the national defense.
LOS ANGELES, March 9—McGeorge Bundy, one of the architects of America's Vietnam war policy, testified today that disclosure of three of the documents in the Pentagon papers case had not damaged the national defense.
WASHINGTON, March 9—What are New Yorkers writing about most to their Senators these days? Food prices? New York City problems?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 9—Lieut. Gen. Tran Van Tra, chief of the Vietcong delegation to the Joint Military Commission, has disclosed that the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government and the Saigon Government have begun discussions of the joint ceasefire body they are to form.
WASHINGTON, March 9 (AP)—The United States has expressed concern to South Vietnam over the treatment of American newsmen, the State Department said today.
WASHINGTON, March 9 (Reuters)—The United States minesweeping force off North Vietnam had its first success today—it detonated one mine.
Inflation has replaced Vietnam as the No. 1 problem facing the country in the latest Gallup Poll, released yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 10 (AP) — The South Vietnamese Government compromised with foreign newsmen today and agreed to expand press representation at a meeting next week with Communist peace‐keeping delegates.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 10—Canada vented her mounting frustration over the failure of the international peace‐keeping commission to fulfill its mission today by publicly criticizing two members of the commission for obstructing an investigation of alleged Communist violations of the cease‐fire.
PHOENIXVILLE, Pa., March 10—When Pvt. Ferdinand Rodriguez of Brooklyn arrived at Valley Forge General Hospital on a stretcher 22 days ago after nearly five years as a prisoner of war, his infirmities were listed as malaria, exhaustion and apprehension.
WASHINGTON, March 10—In the last few days, the Pentagon has been complaining that North Vietnam has been moving substantial quantities of military arms, including tanks, into South Vietnam, but it has not made much of the point that this is a clear violation of the truce agreement.
BELFAST—The balloting in Northern Ireland last week was less spectacular than the bombings in Belfast, less headline‐grabbing than the bombings in London. But it was just as much a part of the Irish war, and about as futile.
Two young French school teachers, André Menras and Jean Pierre Debris, left New York last week to speak in cities across the United States about a matter that stands in sad counterpoint to the return of American prisoners of war from North Vietnam.
CHICAGO, March 10 (AP) —The Chicago Tribune said in its Sunday editions that an American soldier, who allegedly defected to the Vietcong in 1968, has been working in North Vietnamese prison camps and preparing propaganda.
Harry Mark Petrakis is so sincere a writer it's hard to tell how honest he is. The subject of “In the Land of Morning” is grim, or at least glum, but its treatment is mechanical; its attitudes are earthy but their expression literary; its solemnity is muscle‐bound with clichés, and seems to move with the stamping waddle of a sciencefiction movie monster. Thus, when Alex Rifakis returns from Vietnam to his Greek community in Chicago and kisses his mother hello: “Engulfed in her embrace he felt the immensity of her strength, a strength equal to that of a strong man, holding him locked in a vise, his flesh and bones groaning. He felt her breasts, the nipples big and hard as thumbs [she is fully clothed, by the way], the muscles under the slight ripple of fat across her belly, the mound at her loins. When she finally released him, the mask of composure had returned to her cheeks.”
“I'm doing this for personal aggrandizement and to establish a cultural power base here in New York so as to take over the rest of the repertory theaters in the country, and to create a liaison with China and Russia.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 10 (AP)—The Vietcong today called off scheduled Vietnamese prisoner exchanges, charging that Government forces had attacked one of the ?? turnover points and occupied it.
LOS ANGELES, March 10 — Limit Col. Alan L. Brunstrom wants to go to Washington and shake hands with President Nixon, the man, he feels, who brought the prisoners home with honor and justified their sacrifice.
BOSTON, March 11 (AP) —Henry Cabot Lodge, former Ambassador to the United Nations and South Vietnam, was discharged today from Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, where he underwent surgery Thursday for removal of the prostate gland. Mr. Lodge, 70 years old, is a former Senator from Massachusetts.
WASHINGTON, March 11—The White House will ask Congress to approve postwar aid to North Vietnam only if Hanoi begins living up to its part of the Paris agreement, Administration sources said this weekend.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 12 (AP)—The United States announced today that it had halted American troop withdrawals from Vietnam until the Communists released the next to last group of American prisoners of war, scheduled for Wednesday and Thursday, and provide a list, and date of release for the final group.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 11—The case of Tran Ngoc Chau, whose imprisonment by the Saigon Government in 1970 caught world attention, now turns on the question of whether he will be turned over to the Vietcong or set free.
WASHINGTON, March 11 —The White House will ask Congress to approve postwar aid to North Vietnam only if Hanoi begins living up to its part of the Paris agreement, Administration sources said this weekend.
MONTCLAIR, March 11—With Sousa marches, highschool cheers and the harmonies of a barbershop chorus, Montclair today welcomed Comdr. Robert B. Doremus, a native son, back after seven and a half years as a prisoner of war.
WASHINGTON, March 12 —The Defense Department confirmed reports today that North Vietnam has continued some infiltration of weapons, ammunition and military personel South across the demilitarized zone and along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 12 (AP)—The post of senior United States military, information officer in Vietnam, held by a succession of generals and colonels for the last decade, is soon to be filled by a civilian woman.
HONG KONG, March 12 (UPI) Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh of North Vietnam held talks in Peking yesterday with his Chinese counterpart, Chi Peng‐fei, according to Hsinhua, the Chinese press agency. Mr. Trinh stopped in Peking on his way home after attending the international conference on Vietnam in Paris.
To the Editor: May I commit on the recent tragedy in Khartoum? The articulated motives for the promised executions of the assassins are two: that justice should be done, and that future similar acts will be thereby deterred. The justice motive is clearly questionable. There are some undeniable parallels to be drawn between the Khartoum atrocity and the Mylai massacre, terror bombing in Indochina and other U.S. crimes against civilians in Vietnam. All were part of a national policy (and the Palestinian guerrillas consider themselves nationalists above all else) with national agents using the weapons each felt would best further policy objectives. Both, in pursuit of “the cause,” did violence to the innocent in shocking ways, though our own agents were much less discriminating.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 12 (AP)—A Navy pilot among the American prisoners to be released Wednesday is the son of the admiral who directed some of the heaviest bombing raids over North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Tuesday, March 13—The United States announced last nigh that it had received from the North Vietnamese a list of 107 American military prisoners of war and one civilian who are to be released in Hanoi tomorrow.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippities, Wednesday, March 14—Imp third phase of American prisoner‐of‐war releases began, today in Hanoi.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 13 (AP)—A 22‐year‐old Hungarian Army sergeant serving with the International Commission of Control and Supervision defected here over the weekend and has been granted asylum by Australia.
“It's got the longest lines in the world,” the former Special Forces sergeant recalled.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 13—With the final scheduled American withdrawal from Vietnam only two weeks away, there is still little prospect of a true cease‐fire as both the Communists and the South Vietnamese continue to violate many of the basic provisions of the Paris peace agreement.
To the Editor: In commenting on the National Academy of Sciences' study of autos mobile emissions, The Times (editorial Feb. 22) incompletely quotes pollution‐control costs from President Handler's covering letter to Congress and E.P.A. The Times further notes that Handler's letter and the report afford “some inadvertent justification” for a year's delay in imposition of emission standards in 1975 and 1976, as has been urged by the automobile manufacturers. A careful reading of both report and letter would lead to different conclusions.
“It's got the longest lines in the world,” the former Special Forces sergeant recalled.
WASHINGTON, March 13 (UPI)—Bobbyd Joe Keesee's sister said today that he walked out of her home in Albuquerque, N. M., in May, 1970, for “not over an hour” to get his car repaired. Their next meeting will come when the latest group of war prisoiaers freed by North Vietnam arrives home.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 13—With the final scheduled. American withdrawal from Vietnam only two weeks away, there is still little prospect of a true cease‐fire as both the Communists and the South Vietnamese continue to violate many of the basic provisions of the Paris peace agreement.
Cease‐fire or no cease‐fire, fighting is continuing in South Vietnam, with both sides violating the rules almost at will, and with the North Vietnamese by all accounts sending in men and equipment in large quantities. American officials, who for weeks maintained a determined optimism, are now conceding that at least low‐level combat is likely to continue.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 15 (Reuters) —Terrorists threw grenades into a crowded Buddhist pagoda in a Mekong Delta village, shortly after last midnight, killing 10 persons and wounding 88, military sources said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 14 (AP) — The United States temporarily resumed troop withdrawals from South Vietnam today to match the release of 108 American prisoners by North Vietnam, the American command announced.
HONG KONG, Thursday, March 15—The last two American pilots held by China were released today and crossed the border into Hong Kong.
LOS ANGELES, March 14—The jury in the Pentagon papers trial continued its education today in how the United States gathers intelligence.
WASHINGTON, March 14 (AP) — President Nixon today praised the narcotics agents who were instrumental in the conviction of a heroin smuggler who Mr. Nixon said had brought enough drugs into the United States to affect the lives of more persons than were killed in Vietnam
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, March 14—North Vietnam released 108 more American prisoners of war today, including the officer who had acted as commander of prisoners captured in the North.
CANBERRA, Australia, March 14 (Reuters) — A member of the Hungarian delegation helping to supervise the cease‐fire in South Vietnam arrived in Sydney today from Saigon as an immigrant, it was announced here.
A line of Vietnam‐era veterans, some symbolically clad in cast‐off military clothing, filed before the City Commission on Human Rights yesterday to relate their experiences with unemployment, a lack of drug rehabilitation and public indifference.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 15—The Canadian Minister of External Affairs, Mitchell W. Sharp, arrived today on the first leg of an inspection trip to decide whether Canada should continue participation in the International Commission of Control and Supervision, the four‐nation body charged with keeping the peace in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 15 — Lieut. Gen Tran Van Tra, the chief Vietcong delegate to the truce commission, said tonight that “Americans were good soldiers, but they fought the wrong war.”
Neither those who favor it nor those who oppose yet know precisely what post‐war aid to Indochina means. The Nixon Administration is hesitating to make any public proposals until it determines whether the terms of the cease‐fire are going to become effective, and certainly until after all the American prisoners of war are safely out of North Vietnamese custody. But the forces of public opinion are already at work on Congress, in the form of mail by the truckload, and each elected representative will soon face some tricky decisions.
A parade on Fifth Avenue to honor veterans of the Vietnam war will be held Saturday, March 31, it was announced yesterday by the Home With Honor Committee, which is sponsoring the event.
WASHINGTON, March 15 (UPI)—Sargent Shriver made public today a plan for ending poverty in the United States that he said he had given to President Johnson in 1966. Mr. Shriver said the plan had become a “casualty of the war in Vietnam.”
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Friday, March 16 (AP)—A United States Air Force hospital plane took off from Hanoi today with 32 American prisoners of war freed by the Vietcong.
WASHINGTON, March 15—President Nixon voiced concern today about the movement of North Vietnamese militaiy equipment toward South Vietnam and said Hanoi should not “lightly disregard” his words.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 15 (AP)—A predawn service in a Buddhist pagoda in the Mekong Delta was shattered today by a series of explosions that killed at least 17 people and wounded more than 80.
MY LAI 4, South Vietnam, March 15 (AP)—This no man's town is too quiet.
To the Editor: In your March 3 issue President Nixon is reported as comparing opposition to American reconstruction assistance to Hanoi with post‐World War II opposition to aid to Germany and Japan, while Flora Lewis gives reasons for Hanoi's ruling out an inters nationalized aid mechanism.
WASHINGTON, March 15—At least eight of the enlisted men scheduled to return early tomorrow from Hanoi are known to be bitter critics of the Vietnam war whose refusal to participate in camp life in North Vietnam provoked deep hostility among their fellow prisoners, according to military sources.
WASHINGTON, March 15—President Nixon voiced concern today about the movement of North Vietnamese military equipment toward South Vietnam and said Hanoi should not “lightly disregard” his words.
WASHINGTON, March 15—Following is the transcript of President Nixon's news conference today as issued by the White House:
WASHINGTON, March 15—At least eight of the enlisted men scheduled to return early tomorrow from Hanoi are known to be bitter critics of the Vietnam war whose refusal to participate in camp life in North Vietnam provoked deep hostility among their fellow prisoners, according to military sources.
TAY NINH, South Vietnam, March 16—South, Vietnamese and American officials say that Communist forces are ?? in a major build‐up of supplies and military equipment in tiffs critical border province northwest of Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 16 (AP)— A team of American doctors two years ago examined 116 South Vietnamese political prisoners who said they were paralyzed because of maltreatment and concluded that all of them were either faking or were victims of hysteria, according to United States sources.
PARIS, March 16 (AP)—Xuan Thuy, head of the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace talks, today brushed aside warnings by President Nixon about North Vietnamese troop and equipment infiltrations into the South in violation of the peace agreement.
TAY NINH, South Vietnam, March 16—South Vietnaniese and American official's say that Communist forces are engaged in a major build‐up of supplies and military equipment in this critical border province northwest of Saigon.Minh trail.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, March 16—Maj. Floyd J. Thompson of the Army's Special Forces, who spent nine years in captivity, longer than any American military prisoner of war known, was released by the Vietcong in Hanoi today.
WASHINGTON, March 16—A 37‐year‐old employe of the Agency for International Development told today of his five harrowing years as a captive of the North Vietnamese—five years, as he described them, of disease, malnutrition and “extensive coercion.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam March 16 — The Vietcong charged today that the United States was shipping war material into South Vietnam, bypassiog the inspection required by the cease‐fire agreement.
President Nixon certainly has every justification for expressing concern over the continuing violations of the Vietnam cease‐fire agreements, inasmuch as the “rather serious consequences” he mentioned this week involve not only the truce in Southeast Asia but the stability of the American homefront.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 16—The South Vietnamese Government will hold new nationwide elections for village councils, reversing a ban put into effect last May during the Communists' spring offensive, a Government spokesman announced today.
WASHINGTON, March 16—A 37‐year‐old employe of the Agency for International Development told today of his five harrowing years as a captive of the North Vietnamese—five years, as he described them, of disease, malnutrition and “extensive coercion.”
WASHINGTON, March 16—Administration analysts say that most of the more than 300 tanks and hundreds of artillery pieces that have poured down the Ho Chi Minh trail in recent months are now either in South Vietnam or poised along its borders.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 16 (AP)—The editor of North Vietnam's chief newspaper said today that his Government was not hiding any American prisoners and that a search would be started for all the missing and dead as soon as this was possible.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 16 — President Nguyen Van Thieu strongly urged Can ada today to remain a member of the International Commission of Control 04 Supervision.
International
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 17—The chief Vietcong delegate to the truce commission today rejetted as groundless charges by President Nixon that the Communists were infiltrating large quantities of men and weapons into South Vietnam in violation of the cease‐fire.
Americans and Russians, French and British, Germans and Italians, and many more, have been vastly surprised and considerably upset by what has happened in Asia in the last two decades. In brief, the centuries‐old pattern of a world economically and technologically dominated by Western societies has been smashed to smithereens. The most dramatic development has been the rapid transformation of Japan's ruined, partly handicraft postwar economy into a giant, high‐technical economy. Even today, moreover, with the example of Japan dramatically there to alert us, few have noticed how often impressive results seem to ensue whenever any unit of Asian society ultimately rooted in the ancient Chinese culture begins to do business in a fully modern way. Yet that lesson is abundantly plain from the examples of Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and formerly impoverished South Korea, and it should also become plain in South Vietnam, if the South Vietnamese ever get the chance to do business in comparative peace.
WASHINGTON, March 17—In his press conference the other day, President Nixon confirmed that the North Vietnamese had been sending heavy military equipment into South Vietnam in violation of the truce agree meat, and he issued what could only be regarded as a threat of U.S. retaliation if these violations continued.
In his several articles on amnesty over the past two years James Reston Jr. has made a special effort to illuminate the case of the military deserter. “The Amnesty of John David Herndon” is essentially a commissioned work in that cause, done at the suggestion of Safe Return, an American group aiding exiled servicemen and draft resisters. The original design called for Reston to chronicle the return from France of one test‐case deserter, who would hopefully receive a full‐scale courtmartial at which he could offer a Nuremberg defense of his refusal to accept reassignment to Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 17—Pieces of dirty prison clothes, a pile of well‐read books, some graffiti and memories were all that was left today, of American war prisoners at the Hanoi Hilton.
United States intelligence officials in Saigon said yesterday that the Communists had more war supplies in South Vietnam than before their offensive last year, but that their combat units were far below fighting strength. They believe it unlikely that the Communists would attempt a major drive in the immediate future, but are concerned that the large build‐up in military equipment could produce a significant increase in the level of fighting. “The South Vietnamese are damn nervous about all this stuff sitting right there in front of them,” one official said. [Page 1, Column 4.]
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 17—United States intelligence officials said today that the Communists now had more war supplies in South Vietnam than they had before their big offensive last year, but that their combat units were far below fighting strength.
WHEN Joseph Papp's production of David Rabe's “Sticks and Bones” was “postponed indefinitely” from the evening of March 9, on the Columbia Broadcasting System, the debate for and against the decision was quickly drawn along predictable and obvious lines. On the surface, the issues lend themselves to immediate clarity.
To the Editor: The mail has just brought me Mr. [Barnard] Collier's well‐colored portrait (“To tame the monster: A most Galbraithian economist,” Feb. 18), and I naturally wouldn't dream of deleting any of his warts. But could I correct a few matters before they get into the obituaries, about which I'm becoming increasingly sensitive? I did support George McGovern, morally, oratorically and even financially, to the bitter end. Not even George knows whether that helped or hurt. My wife had $1,800 in hand or in prospect when we were married. In those days, before Mr. Nixon's economists who view me with such doubt took charge of the dollar, $1,800 was something. But it was hardly a fortune. Since then our asset position has improved, but for an economist that should be elementary. I settled upon Gstaad as a place to write some 18 years ago, well before it became fashionable. Maybe that is why it became fashionable, but this seems unlikely. I'd like to think I didn't come all that recently to a decent break for women. Gloria Steinem might even confirm that I encouraged her. Mr. Okun, whom I had previously considered a nice but rather harmless man, says that I write popular fiction about economics. This I also would wish to deny. But I am troubled by his charge. Mr. Okun was one of those who principally helped L. B. J. disguise the fiscal effects of the Vietnam war, so on fiction he stands as an expert.
Another group of newly freed prisoners of war came home yesterday.
WASHINGTON —For weeks, ever since the signing of the Paris ceasefire agreement on Vietnam, the Nixon Administration has avoided calling attention to the fact that the firing has not ceased. Typically, at his news conference on March 2, President Nixon remarked that all guerrilla wars linger on and expressed confidence that things would work out. Only the South Vietnamese were heard to protest loudly.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 17—With the withdrawal of American troops less than two, weeks from completion, many of the American civilians who worked with them are remaining behind to help safeguard the cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 19 (Reuters)—An Air Vietnam DC‐4 carrying 59 persons crashed today while flying from Saigon to Ban Me Thuot in the Central Highlands and first reports said all aboard had been killed.
Works about women's experiences, the Vietnam war, films and the environment are among the 109 books named today as leading contenders for this year's 10 National Book Awards‐the book world's equivalent of the movie Oscars.
SAN DIEGO, March 18—The Navy is having difficulty in its efforts to prove, before series of courts‐martial here, that black crew members incited a racial riot aboard the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk during combat operations last October off the coast of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 18 (AP)—South Vietnamese military officials said today that they would send complaints of attacks on two of their positions north of Saigon to international truce observers because Communist peace‐keeping delegates refused to investigate.
Fifty‐three former war prisoners received a rousing hero's welcome yesterday when they returned to the United States mainland, but three men who reportedly belonged to a prisoner “peace committee” while in captivity were greeted by silence when they got off a medical plane in California.
DAYTON, Ohio, March 18 (UPI)—A former prisoner of war will throw out the first ball at major league baseball's opening game April 5, officials at Wright Patterson Air Force Base said today.
"There's no time. There's no time for any of this.""Almost eight hours. Some people don't ever have eight hours."And so together they begin to waste those eight hours hand and hand, strolling down the dark and deserted boulevards past all the tourist attractions of Paris. Pausing before Notre Dame she grows bitterly philosophical: "By the time you get out, that may have become a parking edifice!" But eventually they do get to bed, and, through a night of blurred-focus passion, they make love. And if she does not say "I never knew it could be like this," it is perhaps only because she could never be heard over the welling up of the music — the music that follows them everywhere on plucked and bowed strings and sounds nothing like so much as total submission to the last three bars of the "Summer of '42" theme.They have come to Paris—he, she and the background music—from Marrakesh, and they are bound for New York. They are the central elements in Robert Wise's "Two People," a very silly movie that opened yesterday at the Baronet Theater. He is Evan Bonner, high-principled Vietnam war deserter returning home to face the music (not this music, some other music). She is Deirdre McCluskey, high-fashion model and daughter of a West Virginia coal miner (what else?), returning home to her little illegitimate son, to at least $100,000 a year and to a life that has lost its meaning. Naturally, they fall in love.I am tempted to hang the movie with quotations from its dialogue — which would be unfair. It is really equally bad in all departments. It may even be most aggressively awful when its people stop talking and take the train from Marrakesh to Casablance or the plane from Casablanca to Paris (first class all the way) or just watch the streets from their hotel rooms. There has never been such appreciation for the poetry of Paris traffic patterns, and in general the esthetic program behind "Two People" seems to be: When in doubt, travel.Estelle Parsons plays a supporting role as a fashion editor accompanying Deirdre, and, though conventionally brittle, her performance comes closer to suggesting two sides to a person than does any other characterization, in the movie. As Deirdre, Lindsay Wagner, a newcomer, is pretty and solemn. But a tendency for her facial expressions to disintegrate into grimaces (perhaps occasioned by the lines she must speak) makes it difficult to accept her quality. Peter Fonda, as Evan Bonner, seems greatly withdrawn to some inward meditation—a strategy, I believe, not of performance but of self-defense.Separate units are credited with filming in North Africa, in Paris and in New York City. But "Two People" is remarkably of a piece—not with the consistency of a movie director like Robert Wise, but rather with the consistency of something cooked up from the same package of synthetic soup.
LONDON, March 18—The stories from Washington about alleged North Vietnamese infiltration southward in violation of the truce terms have had a well‐orchestrated quality. First reports of the movement of men and arms were leaked. Then the Pentagon officially endorsed the field reports. Finally the President spoke gravely of them at his press conference.
A jury heeded the urgings of prosecution and defense lawyers and found a.25‐year‐old Vietnam veteran not guilty by reason of insanity of the killing of a Roman Catholic priest in 1971. The jury ordered the defendant held in a state psychiatric hospital.
McGUIRE AIR FORCE BASE, N. J., March 19— Ten military servicemen and two civilians, all former Vietnam war prisoners, arrived here by transport plane shortly after 3 P.M. today.
William S. Paley, board chairman of the Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc., personally vetoed the showing “Sticks and Bones” a biting drama about a blinded Vietnam veteran's homecoming, on the C.B.S.‐TV network as scheduled for March 9, it was learned yesterday.
CAMP PENDLETON, Calif. March 19—Mrs. Mildred A. Ridgeway of Houston wept again today for her eldest son, but this time her tears were for joy over his return from five years of Vietcong imprisonment.
BALTIMORE;, March 19 (AP) —Thomas E. Southerland pleaded guilty today to four counts of possessing false military identification and leave papers in a case that the Government had contended earlier involved heroin smuggling.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 19 (AP)—The United States, North and South Metnam and the Vietcong were reported near agreement today On a combined search for ericans and. American dead unaccounted for in Vietnam. A United States spokesman said that the operation was expected to take years.
PARIS, March 19 — The rival South Vietnamese admirdstrations opened negotiations on the political future of their country here today, seven weeks after procilamation of the cease‐fire.
Motion picture rights to “The Sunshine Boys,” Neil Simon's hit play at the Broadhurst Theater, have been acquired by Columbia Piotures and Rastar Productions, headed by Ray Stark, in what a spokesman for Rastar said “could develop into the highest price ever paid for a play.” Mr. Simon will write the film script of his comedy, which deals with a pair of fanious old vaudevillians, portrayed onstage by Jack Albertson and Sara Levene. Columbia plans to release the film version during the 1974–75 season.
UNIONDALE, L.I., March 19 — Sgt, Richard Perricone's hometown gave him a rousing welcome today — something they had been waiting to do for more than six years.
To the Editor: The Times has a rather consistent and alarming misunderstanding regarding the situation on the Ainercan farm today.
ALBANY, March 20 — The Senate approved legislation today providing a tuition‐free college education for Vietnam veterans who were prisoners of war or missing in action, as well as for their children and the children of servicemen who were killed in the war.
WASHINGTON, March 20 —The United States intelligence community has reported a significant reduction in the number of North Vietnamese troops and the amount of equipment that have recently entered the infiltration routes toward South Vietnam, well‐placed Administration officials said today.
A parade honoring returning veterans of the war in Vietnam that was originally scheduled for Fifth Avenue on March 31 will instead start at 37th Street and Broadway and move up Broadway and Central Park West to 72d Street.
WASHINGTON, March 20—The United States intelligence community has reported a significant reduction in the number of North Vietnamese troops and the amount of equipment that have recently entered the infiltration routes toward South Vietnam, well‐placed Administration officials said today.
Fifty‐one, days after the signing of the Vietnam ceasefire agreements the two South Vietnamese sides have finally got down to talking about the political future of their land. For the first time in the long series of Vietnam conferences the common language of the participants Vietnamese. By rights, this Paris conference should be the culmination of a decade of war, the forum at which at last can be exercised “the South Vietnamese people's right to self‐determination,” in the words of the truce agreements. These documents blandly declared that ninety days would be a reasonable period for the two sides to Teach agreement on their internal affairs.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, March 20 (UPI)—United States hospital sources said today that North Vietnamese interrogators had tortured Bobby Joe Keesee, the civilian prisoner of war released by Hanoi last week, possibly because they thought he was a spy.
BIRMINGHAM, Mich.—While the heads‐up, manly bearing of the American P.O.W.'s returning from Hanoi should command our admiration, it will be both untimely and unfair to contrast this showing with what is remembered of American behavior in the Korean P.O.W. camps some twenty years ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 20 — After weeks of inactivity, field teams of the International Commission of Control and Supervision have started investigating the frequent violations of the cease‐fire in Vietnam.
Administration hopes for a stable peace in Indochina, already jarred by the reported Communist military build‐up in South Vietnam, are further threatened by the deteriorating political situation in neighboring Cambodia.
Dick Sadler, manager of George Foreman, scoffed at reports yesterday that the world heavyweight champion was approached for a title defense against Muhammad Ali, the former titleholder, with each fighter to get $5‐million.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 22—The Saigon military command said today that it had successfully lifted the siege of a small outpost surrounded by Communist troops for more than a week.
STOCKHOLM, March 21 —Foreign Minister Mister Wickman said today that it was important to improve Sweden's relations with the United States, frozen since Christmas time when Premier Olo Palme criticized the United States bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 21 — The Government has begun moving the first of a planned total of 100,000 refugees from the northernmost provinces to unsettled land near Saigon, more than 300 miles away, a ranking South Vietnamese official reported yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 22 (AP)—The United States demanded today that North Vietnam supply list of American prisoners of war held in Laos and the date and place at which they will be released.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 22—The Saigon military command said, yesterday that it had opened a major attack to break the siege of a small outpost surrounded by Communist troops for more than a week.
WASHINGTON, March 21—A Federal appeals court here has declared that questions dealing with the legality of the Vietnam War are political issues beyond the scope of the judicial powers of the United States Constitution.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, March 23—The FourParty Joint Military Commission failed today to break the deadlock that arose yesterday over the release of the final group of American prisoners of war.
WASHINGTON, March 22—The Senate Armed Services Committee agreed today to delay for one more week the pending promotions of more than 4,800 Air Force officers. This seemed to end a Senate impasse stemming from last year's hearings on the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, March 23—A new dispute developed between the United States and the Communists yesterday over the release of the final group of American prisoners of war.
Lieut. George T. Coker, of the Navy, who spent six and a half years in North Vietnamese prison camps, said here yesterday that he was a “better man” for his experience.
WASHINGTON, March 22 (UPI)—President and Mrs. Nixon have invited all United States prisoners of the Vietnam war to spend a day at the White House on May 24.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 20—The long struggle for control of the South Vietnamese people is entering new and important phase, full of uncertainties and difficulties for both the Vietcong and the Government.
Mayor Lindsay designated March 31 as “Home With Honor Day” yesterday and urged New Yorkers to join in a tribute to all members of the armed services who served in the Vietnam conflict.
PARIS, March 22 — South Vietnamese talks looking toward a political settlement stuck today on the question of an agenda for negotiations, as Vietcong and Saigon delegates exchanged charges of “grave” truce violations.
A new controversy over the return of American prisoners of war arose yesterday, with the United States' insistence that 10 Americans held in Laos be included when the last group of prisoners is released in Hanoi this weekend. United States sources say the return of the prisoners in Laos was part of an American‐North Vietnamese understanding. The Communists say the United States is introducing a new—and unacceptable—condition. [Page 1, Column 1.]
HUE, South Vietnam, March 14—The barbed wire is coming down in Hue, and some people are dismantling their bunkers.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, March 24—The United. States and the Communists remained deadlocked today in a dispute over the release of the final group of American pris oners of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 23 (AP)—Thirty three refugees were killed and 65 wounded early today when Communist forces fired a rocket into a resettlement camp in Chau Doc Province 95 miles southwest of here, the Saigon command reported.
LONDON, March 23 — The British Govermient's White Paper on the future of Northern Ireland pleased the leaders of opinion on this side of the Irish Sea. The press and the politicians of both major parties gave it the ad jectives of highest British praise: fair, practical, reasonable,
Governor Rockefeller announced his support yesterday of the Horne With Honor Day parade that will be held here next Saturday to honor veterans of the Vietnam War.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, March 24—The United States and the Communists remained deadlocked today in a dispute over the release of the final group of American prisoners of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 23—The Saigon Government has moved several thousand people in the Central Highlands, against their will in many cases and despite strong protests from American officials.
SAIGON, March 24 (UPI)—The Vietcong rejected today United States charges of ceasefire violations, saying they had placed antiaircraft missiles in the Khe Sanh area before the Jan. 28 truce.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 24 (AP)—Can it really be that somewhere in South Vietnam the Vietcong are running a mobile snack bar, stolen from the Americans, complete with popcorn popper and ice cream machine?
OTTAWA, March 24—While its official position is not expected to be announced until Tuesday, the Canadian Government has laid virtually all the groundwork for an announcement that the 290 Canadian observers will stay on duty in South Vietnam.
SAIGON—The pattern was becoming a familiar one: an allegedly flagrant violation of the cease‐fire, a challenge to the peace‐keeping machinery to take some action — and paralysis.
MIAMI, March 24—President Nixon issued a 1,200‐word statement today praising the 2.5 million Vietnam veterans and urging Americans to offer them respect and opportunities and saying that “in every area of Government concern, we are now doing more than we have ever done” for discharged servicemen.
BIEN HOA, South Vietnam, Sunday, March 25 — More than 200 Communist‐side prisoners, most of them reported to be North Vietnamese, refused repatriation today in the biggest mass defection since the Vietnam peace agreement was signed Jan. 27.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 24—Gen. Duong Van Minh said today that only “third force” could guarantee the spirit of reconcilation and concord called for by the Paris cease‐fire agreements.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, March 25—A new attempt to break the deadlock over the release of the last American prisoners of war yesterday succeeded only in producing new Communist demands.
The big problem of Vietnamera veterans is the lack of interest by, businesses and the public in their difficulties in finding jobs, some heads of government agencies devoted to veterans affairs have said.
More than 500 filled St. Paul's Roman Catholic Church in Congers, N. Y., yesterday morning for a folk mass commemorate the deaths of five Nyack High School students one year ago when their school bus was struck by Penn Central freight train.
MIAMI, March 25—President Nixon said today that he had ordered United States forces to stay in South Vietnam until all American prisoners of war have been released.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 26—The dispute over the release of the last American prisoners of war remained deadlocked yesterday, but United States officials privately expressed confidence that it would be resolved by Wednesday's deadline for the final pullout of American troops.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 25 (AP)—An Indonesian member of the International Commission of Control and Supervision was seriously wounded tonight when a sniper fired on the jeep in which he was riding in the Mekong Delta city of Can Tho, commission sources said.
MIAMI, March 25—President Nixon said today that he had ordered United States forces to stay in South Vietnam until all American prisoners of war have been released.
To the Editor:
The coming week is to mark a turning point in Vietnam as momentous as the declaration of cease‐fire two months ago. By Wednesday all American prisoners war are supposed to be released from captivity in North Vietnam. And, for the first time in a decade, there are to be no more United States military personnel on duty with the South Vietnamese armed forces.
CAN THO, South Vietnam, March 26—With the enthusiasm of a farmer trying out a new tractor, President Nguyen Van Thieu bounded through an American‐style agricultural exhibition here today in the heart of South Vietnam's rich rice lands.
MIAMI, March 26—The White House announced today that agreement had been reached to complete by Thursday the release of the last of the United States prisoners of war in Indochina and the withdrawal of the remaining American combat forces from South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 26 — Truong Dinh Dzu, a peace candidate in the 1967 presidential election, was released from jail today after nearly five years in which he was one of South Vietnam's hest‐known political prisoners.
PARIS, March 26—Vietcong and Saigon delegations met today for about two hours but failed for the third time to agree on an agenda for negotiations leading to national elections in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, March 27 — A North Vietnamese spokesman said last night that his country intended to withdraw its delegation to the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission in South Vietnam by the end of the week.
MIAMI, March 26— The White House announced today that agreement had been reached to complete by Thursday the release of the last of the United States prisoners of war in Indochina and the with drawal of the remaining American combat forces from South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 26 (Reuters) — The Four‐Party Joint Military Commission was asked today to investigate the shooting of a jeep carrying three Indonesian members of the peacekeeping force in the Mekong Delta town of Can Tho yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 26 — Truong Dinh Dzu, a peace candidate in the 1967 presidential election, was released from jail today after nearly five years in which he was one of South Vietnam's best‐known political prisoners.
HANOI, North Vietnam (AP) —Much of Hanoi's charm has survived the war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, March 28 — The withdrawal of the remaining American troops in Vietnam resumed yesterday.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Wednesday, March 28 —The final stage in the release of American prisoners of the Vietnam war began yesterday as 32 who had been held by the Vietcong were freed in Hanoi and flown to Clark Air Base.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, March 27—A Pentagon official said here today that the North Vietnamese were ready to facilitate the United States military's search for missing American soldiers and unrecovered bodies as soon as prisoner exchanges are completed this week.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines, Wednesday, March 28 —The final stage in the release of American prisoners of the Vietnam war began yesterday as 32 who had been held by the Vietcong were freed in Hanoi and flown to Clark Air Base.
SAN FRANCISCO, March 27 (UPI) — An Army officer said today that he made voluntary statements for the Hanoi radio during the six years that he was a prisoner in Vietnam to let his family know he was alive.
OTTAWA, March 27—External Affairs Minister Mitchell W. Sharp announced today that Canada would keep its 290 cease‐fire observers in Vietnam for at least 90 days more.
NEW HAVEN—All wars seem to require heroes around which civilian populations can cleanse themselves of guilt and reassert immortalizing principles. But this may be the first war in history in which returning priioners of war have been selected for that role.
WASHINGTON, March 27 (AP)—The Pentagon said today that American prisoners of war would be free to talk about their experiences as soon as all were back on American soil, probably Monday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, March 28 — The withdrawal of the remaining American troops in Vietnam resumed yesterday.
Now that the last of the American prisoners and troops are on their way home from Vietnam, it would be useful if President Nixon would tell the country what authority he thinks he has to carry on military action in Indochina rather than leaving the explanation to Senator Barry Goldwater.
The last of the prisoners are about to be freed; the United States expeditionary force in Vietnam is its final hours. But for the men who carried the American presence into the mountains and jungles of Vietnam, this post‐war era opens with a legacy of disillusionment and maladjustment.
Vice President Agnew defended this country's role in the Vietnam war last night, describing it “as one of the most unselfish missions ever to be undertaken by any nation in defense of another.”
Despite grumbling from Capitol Hill, Secretary of Defense Richardson insisted yesterday that President Nixon has clear constitutional authority to continue bombing in Cambodia to clean up a “lingering corner of the war.” The assertion came as several Senators challenged the President's authority to keep up the bombing once American troops are withdrawn froin South Vietnam. [Page 1, Column 1.]
SAIGON, South. Vietnam, Thursday, March 29—Two days before departing on a trip to the United States, President Nguyen Van Thieu formally inaugurated a new political party yesterday in an effort to consolidate his control over South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, March 28 —The United States sought to extend the life of the Four‐Party Joint Military Commission in South Vietnam, but failed to gain Hanoi's support, an Administration official said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 28—The 60‐day first phase of the Vietnam ceasefire came to an end today with fighting continuing, peace‐keeping machinery in a state of disarray and the prospects for real peace in South Vietnam apparently remote.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, March 28—Malaysia, in keeping with her policy of even‐handed relations with all power blocs, will recognize North Vietnam in the next few days, according to Foreign Ministry sources.
CLARK AIR BASE, The Philippines, Thursday, March 29—The Communists freed 49 more American prisoners in Hanoi yesterday, including a charter pilot held since 1965, one of the civilian American prisoners held Iongest by the Vietcong.
A former infantryman who served in Vietnam charged yesterday that he had lost an eye damaged in combat after the Veterans Administration denied him medical treatment because he had an undesirable discharge from the Army.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 28—Despite the continuing dim outlook for peace in Vietnam, a certain relaxation has begun to appear in the austere life of the country as the first two months of the cease‐fire come to an end.
Four of the recently released prisoners of the war in Vietnam have been selected for promotion to general or admiral, the Defense Department announced. Named for promotion to brigadier general were two Air Force colonels John P. Flynn and David W. Winn. Selected for promotion to rear admiral were two Navy captains, Jeremiah A. Denton and James B. Stockdale. The promotions, the Defense Department said, have been approved by President Nixon and sent to the Senate for confirmation.
WASHINGTON, March 28 —Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson maintained today that the President had clear constitutional authority to continue bombing in Cambodia to clean up a “lingering corner of the war.”
WASHINGTON, March 28—Two months have passed since the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement was signed on Jan. 27 in Paris. Following are questions and answers on how the accord has affected the situation in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 28—The 60‐day first phase of the Vietnam ceasefire came to an end today with fighting continuing, peace‐keeping machinery in a state of disarray and the prospects for real peace in South Vietnam apparently remote.
PARIS, Tenn., March 28 (AP) —Maj. Robert Peel of the Air Force, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam, apparently, fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his new $10,000 sports car against a utility pole early today, the Tennessee Highway Patrol aid. Patrolmen said that Major Peel had not been seriously injured and hed been released from Henry County General Hospital after treatment. The car, an Italian‐made Pantera, was wrecked.
ALBANY, March 28 — The Assembly passed and sent to the Senate today a bill that would require every pharmacy to post, a state list of the 150 most frequently ordered prescription drugs and the pharmacy's current retail prices.
WASHINGTON, March 28—Enthusiastic about the unexpected usefulness the B‐52 bomber demonstrated in the Indochina war, the Pentagon is seeking nearly $200‐millon to extend the life of about five squadrons to preserve the plane's nonnuclear capability through the nineteen‐seventies.
The expected return today of the last American combat troops and prisoners from Vietnam should be an occasion for universal relief and rejoicing, marking the end of the long and anguished United States intervention in Indochina. To most Americans it is inconceivable that this country would again become militarily involved in a regime so remote from any vital national strategic interest.
CU CHI, South Vietnam, March 29— The olive‐drab statue of an American soldier that stood at the crossroads of this town near Saigon tumbled and disappeared recently — “blown away by the wind,” according to Vietnamese children here.
WASHINGTON, March 29—President Nixon, in an address to the nation proclaiming the disengagement of United States ground forces from Vietnam, issued a new warning tonight to North Vietnam against failure to comply with the Paris peace agreement.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 29—As tens of thousands of North Vietnamese watched and smiled and waved, the last 67 American prisoners flew out of Hanoi to freedom today.
WASHINGTON, March 29—The Defense Department said today that the United States had dropped about 11,000 mines in North Vietnamese waters.
State Supreme Court Justice Xavier C. Riccobono yesterday ordered at least a partial reopening of the case William A. (Tony) Maynard, convected in 1967 and sentenced to 20 years in the shooting of Marine Sgt. Michael Kroll, a much‐decorated Vietnam veteran who was killed M Greenwich Village. The judge's order will allow socalled new evidence and allegations of misconduct officials to be heard.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 29—The last American troops left South Vietnam today, leaving behind an unfinished war that has deeply scarred this country and the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 29—The last American troops left South Vietnam today, leaving behind an unfinished war that has deeply scarred this country and the United States.
LONDON, March 29 (AP)—One of London's longest political demonstrations ended yesterday when opponents of the Vietnam war furled their banners outside the United States Embassy for the last time.
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's address last night, as recorded through the facilities of A.B.C. News:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 29—The United States military mission in Vietnam has formally ended, but 7,200 civilian employes of the Department of Defense remain, most of them technicians helping the South Vietnamese armed forces.
WASHINGTON, March 29—Former prisoners of war told chilling stories today of mental and physical torture at the hands of their North Vietnamese captors.
WASHINGTON, March 29—President Nixon, in an address to the nation proclaiming the disengagement of United States ground forces from Vietnam, issued a new warning tonight to North Vietnam against failure to comply with the Paris peace agreement.
WASHINGTON, March 29—Former prisoners of war told chilling stories today of mental and physical torture at the hands of their North Vietnamese captors.
CLARK AIR BASE, the Phi lippines, March 29—The last 6 American prisoners held by th3 North Vietnamese arrived to night after being released Hanoi. All but one were she down late in December an most were B‐52 crewmen.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 29—As tens of thousands of North Vietnamese watched and smiled and waved, the last 67 American prisoners flew out of Hanoi to freedom today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 29—Following are the texts of two speeches made here today by Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, United States commander in South Vietnam. The first marked the deactivation of the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam; and the second, addressed to the South Vietnamese, was made just before he boarded a plane to leave the country.
TRENTON, March 29—The State Assembly passed by a vote of 60 to 0 today a bill that would give New Jersey's Vietnam veterans $500 a year toward their college tuition.
WASHINGTON, March 29 (AP)—The Senate Armed Services Committee today approved 4,897 Air Force and Navy officers for promotion. The action was taken after the Pentagon certified that none of them had falsified reports on illegal bombing in Vietnam.
Phase I of the Paris peace accords has now been completed with the withdrawal of the last American ground combat troops from Vietnam and the return of the last war prisoners from North Vietnam. This is a notable achievement of the Administration, and it is one that has brought great relief to the country as a whole.
WASHINGTON, March 29 —Three Republican Senators said today that President Nixon did not have constitutional or any other legal authority to continue bombing in Cambodia now that the withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam had been completed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 30—President Nguyen Van Thieu is preparing to set out for the United States tomorrow, and officials at the presidential residence say that his principal purpose is to obtain directly from President Nixon the minimal assurances underwriting the survival of a non‐Communist South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 30—President Nguyen Van Thieu is preparing to set out for the United States tomorrow, and officials at the presidential residence say that his principal purpose is to obtain directly from President Nixon the minimal assurances underwriting the survival of non‐Communist South Vietnam.
At least 50,000 marchers are expected to parade north through the canyons of midtown Broadway today to honor the men who served in Southeast Asia during the 12‐year Vietnam war, parade officials said yesterday.
PARIS, March 30 (Reuters)—The Vietcong said today that thousands of United States military advisers disguised as civilians remained in South Vietnam and that their presence hindered a political settlement.
LONDON—Those with weak stomachs for the unpleasant should step reading now.
WASHINGTON, March 30 (Reuters)—President Nixon today accepted with “deepest personal regret” the resignation of Ellsworth Bunker as United States Ambassador to South Vietnam and announced that he would name a career diplomat, Graham A. Martin, to the Saigon post.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, March 30 (AP)—South Vietnam complained today to the International Commission of Control and Supervision that Communist‐led forces had carried out sustained shelling and infantry assaults on ranger camps at Tong Le Chan, 50 miles north of Saigon, and at Rach Bap, 30 miles north of the capital.
WASHINGTON, March 30—One of the senior American officers in the North Vietnamese prison camps said today that the prisoners “forced” their captors “to be brutal to us” by resisting their demands to the last possible point of human endurance.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 30 —The acting Defense Minister said today that there were growing indications that North Vietnam did not intend to withdraw its troops from Laos and might even be planning to seize more territory.
At least 50,000 marchers are expected to parade north through the canyons of midtown Broadway today to honor the men who served in Southeast Asia during the 12‐year Vietnam war, parade officials said yesterday.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 29 — Despite the heavy facade of official policy statements confronting any foreign visitor to North Vietnam, scores of Hanoi residents proved to be startlingly frank, curious and amiable to one visitor, believed to be the first VietnameseAmerican to come here since the country became independent.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 31—Since the cease‐fire began in. January the Saigon Government has forcibly moved thousands of Mekong Delta peasants out of areas frequented by the Vietcong.
WASHINGTON, July 31—Iran has agreed to an American request that she take Canada's place on the four‐nation ceasefire commission in South Vietnam, Administration officials said today.
ASPEN, Colo. — It is frequently, said that the most heavily armed powers are paralyzed by their military strength because they cannot use it to any sensible political purpose. It is also said the superpowers have discovered that underdeveloped nations are difficult to deal with, as America found in Vietnam and Russia found in the Congo, Indonesia and Egypt.
WASHINGTON, July 31 (AP) —The Senate Armed Services Committee voted today to reduce military aid for South Vietnam and Laos to $952‐million for the current fiscal year.
LONDON, July 31 (Reuters) —North Vietnam today accused the United States and South Vietnam of serious breaches of the Indochina peace accords.
HAI LANG, South Vietnam, July 28—After more than a year as a refugee, a 62‐year‐old farmer returned home today to the Street Without Joy.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 2 (UPI) —Ellsworth Bunker, the former United States Ambassador to South Vietnam, was nominated by President Nixon today to be an ambassador‐at‐large.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 2 (UPI) — South Vietnam has no plans to intervene in the Cambodian fighting but may do so if Phnom Penh asks for help, a South Vietnam Government spokesman said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 2 (AP)—The AmericanRadio Service Vietnam has discontinued verbatim coverage of the Watergate hearings because listeners wanted to hear more music, a spokesman for the United Statesdefense attachés office said today.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 2—The Nixon Administration said today that the Cambodian Government, faced by an end of all American bombing support on Aug. 15, would continue to get from the United States all the economic, military and diplomatic assistance still possible under the law.
SAIGON, South Vietnam — In the crowded side entrance of one of Saigon's pagodas, the Minh Huong, a woman with a black birthmark on her right cheek sits telling fortunes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 3 (UPI) — The Vietcong Foreign Ministry has charged that Canada's delegation to the International Commission of Control and Supervision acted as a “cover” for United States truce violations in Vietnam, Hanoi's Vietnam News Agency said today in a broadcast monitored here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 3 (Reuters)—United States Air Force liaison flights ??? Saigon and Hanoi resumed today after a seven week halt caused by the refusal of North Vietnam and Vietcong officials to sign flight‐safety documents.American sources in Saigon said the four sides on the Joint Military Commission—the United States, the Vietcong, the South Vietnamese and the North Vietnamese—had agreed to read and sign a receipt for a copy of the standard United States Air Force flight‐safety regulations, a move that would cover all liaison flights.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 3—The Justice Department reopened today its investigation of the shootings at Kent State University on May 4, 1970, in which Ohio National Guardsmen killed four students and wounded nine others during a campus protest against expansion of the Vietnam war into Cambodia.
KONTUM, South Vietnam, July 29—The soldiers of South Vietnam's 23d Division who defend this beleaguered city in the Central Highlands recently received a gift of 200 chickens from a school in Saigon. But, knowledgeable sources here say, an officer appropriated the chickens, sold them in the market and used the money for a party for fellow officers.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 3—The Justice Department reopened today its investigation of the shootings at Kent State University on May 4, 1970, in which Ohio National Guardsmen killed four students and wounded nine others during a campus protest against expansion of the Vietnam war into Cambodia.
WASHINGTON—The death of four Kent State Uinversity students at the hands of the Ohio National Guard in May, 1970, will stand as a bloody monument to the domestic crisis brought on by the war in Vietnam. For the families of those killed and wounded, as well as for many other Americans, there has always been an additional burden: the strong suspicion that in the investigation following the event, justice was not fully done, and perhaps not even fully sought.
TRENTON — The effects of inflation and the end of the Vietnam war have reduced this year, for the first time since 1966, the ntimber of New Jersey high school graduates going on to college. Instead, a greater proportion of the students are entering the job market, particdarly in semi‐skilled trades and white‐collar positions.
TEHERAN, Iran, Aug. 4 (AP) —North Vietnam and Iran decided today to establish diplomatic relations at the ambassadorial level, officials reported.
DA NANG, South Vietnam, July 29—When the sun rises across the Da Nang River, Nguyen Van So's solid brass vases, lamps and candlesticks begin to gleam.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 4—The swift sequence of events in the Supreme Court today left open the thorny legal question of whether the American combat involvement in Indochina was ever constitutionally justified.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Aug. 4—North Vietnam has begun negotiating for assistance from the United Nations Children's Fund following a visit to Hanoi by two senior officials of the aid agency.
To the Editor: James Jones's quick trip through Vietnam seems to have allowed him barely enough time to transcribe the propaganda releases of the United States and Saigon intelligence and psych war services. His treatment of the alleged Hue massacre of 1968 (“In the shadow of peace,” June 10) is scandalous in its lack of the slightest critical analysis of official handouts or independent investigation or knowledge of events or literature.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Aug. 5 (AP)—Communist‐led troops shelled positions around the old imperial capital of Hue for the first time in months, and 78 soldiers were killed in fighting elsewhere in Vietnam, the South Vietnamese command said today.
Leading figures of 70 nations believe that the United States did not gain by its involvement in Vietnam, according to a Galhip Poll.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 4 (Reuters)—South Vietnam and the United States this week signed an agreement for a $50‐million loan, the first development loan from the United States since 1961.
GAINESVILLE, Fla., Aug. 5—In another time, another war, they might have been greeted as returned heroes. Scattered among the seven young men are 57 campaign medals, citations and decorations.
To the Editor: It was surprising and disturbing to read in Drew Middleton's July 15 news report that American military strategists are discussing preparations for intervention in small wars. Have we learned nothing from Vietnam?
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Aug. 3 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese command today reported a fresh upsurge of fighting across the country with heavy clashes in areas where both sides dispute control.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, July 29—Life was better for Nguyen Duc Thang when the American soldiers were here in this dusty Central Highlands city. Not becattse they ever bought the boiled duck eggs he peddles for a living but because his Vietnamese customers had more money then.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, July 29 — The bar where Van used to work closed last spring when the American soldiers departed. She has been too embarrassed to go back to her family in the Mekong Delta, 300 miles away.
HOME FROM THE WAR. Vietnam Veterans: Neither Victims nor Executioners. By Robert Jay Litton. 478 pages. Simon and Schuster. $8.95.
DA NANG, South Vietnam—On the vast Da Nang air base, a new, formidable enemy has confronted the South Vietnamese Air Force since the American pullout: termites.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 6— The campaigns for election to South Vietnam's Senate officially opened today without any senatorial candidate in the running who opposes President Nguyen Van Thieu.
Harold S. Geneen, chairman of the International Telephone, and Telegraph Corporation, has denied that he blamed Robert S. McNamara, a former Secretary of Defense, for the Vietnam war and the Edsel automobile.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Avig. 7 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese command today reported the highest level of fighting across the country since mid‐June.
DA NANG, South Vietnam —Some cities are proud of their gardens, their fountains or their cathedrals. Da Nang is proud of its sidewalks.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 8—Three veterans told the Senate Armed Services Committee today that while serving in Vietnam they participated either ini the designation of North Vietnamese and Vietcong hospitals’ as bombing targets or in the’ actual destruction of them.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 8—Three veterans told the Senate Armed Services Committee today that while serving in Vietnam they participated either in the designation of North Vietnamese and Vietcong hospitals as bombing targets or in the actual destruction of them.
To the Editor: Confirmation that the California Bar Association has in fact undertaken a preliminary investigation into the actions of the President and other lawyers involved in the Watergate matter should serve as a spur to other bar associations —New York comes promptly to mind—to commence similar proceedings involving lawyers whose ethically questionable conduct has been established.
PARIS, Aug, 8 (Reuters) —Deputy Premier Nguyen Luu Vien of South Vietnam warned today that a Communist takeover in Phnom Penh would jeopardize the Vietnam peace accord and cause his Government to reconsider its attitude on talks with the Vietcong here concerning South Vietnam's political future.
In "Gordon's War," four black veterans of Vietnam wage fierce personal battle, using Army tactics, against drug channelers in Harlem. What, indeed, could be more admirable? This is a worthy film, whose format and substance—a black theme dramatized, for practical, constructive purposes—remain exceeded by its goal.The picture is tough, fast, moves in a straight line with no sideline fiddling but with pungent humor and vividly jabs the crime-ridden underbelly of Harlem. The sharp direction of Ossie Davis catches the argot, the flavor and the sinister ambiance of the area. And Mr. Davis stages a wingding of a car-motorcycle chase near the end.But the picture is inconclusive, far from profound, and the urgency of the theme has been overly simplified to fit the action. Only in the first part of the script is there character probing, as Paul Winfield (of "Sounder") broods over the addiction of his dead wife and recruits his three pals for personal and moral vengeance. A real uptown dope purge, says somebody, "would take an army."These four—Carl Lee, David Dowling and Tony King are the others—do very well on their own. Fiercely, methodically, the good guys nail the bad guys, with comparative ease. No policeman or detective, black or white, ever appears. At the fade-out, which simply hangs in midair like a warning, four white business executives are lined up as the culprits. "Gordon's War" is well-fought but definitely not the drug war to end them all.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 10 (Reuters)—New fighting has flared in two areas of South Vietnam with Communist forces attacking Government infantry positions, the Saigon command said today.
DA NANG, South Vietnam July 29—The failure of the Paris peace agreement to end the war has brought many different sadnesses to many Vietnamese, but perhaps the most unusual sorrow is being endured by a 65 — year — old man named Nguyen Xuan Dong, who lives in a little house across the street from a museum here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 10—A network of roads the Communists have been energetically building in South Vietnam since the American bombing halt in January now stretches over 250 miles from the North Vietnamese border to the central part of the country, American intelligence officials say.
MOSCOW, Aug 10. (UPI) —Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam arrived in the Crimea today at the head of a governmental delegation, Tass, the Soviet press agency, reported.
“STICKS AND BONES” will finally reach the homescreen on CBS this Friday night at 9, only five months late, maybe. I say maybe because once burned is twice chastened. I've already reviewed the TV version of David Rabe's play once, last March, galloping into print with extravagant remarks, promising confidently that the telecast would “drive a nail into your forehead and leave your face hanging like a sack from it all weekend long.” Between the publication of that review and the air‐date of the program, without my permission, “Sticks and Bones” was canceled. This sort of thing injures a reviewer in his omniscience.
TEANECK—The last United States ground‐combat troops left Indochina six months ago, and the American bombing of Cambodia is scheduled to end on Wednesday. But the Bergen County Peace Center toils on.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, today that 71 former South Aug. 11—The Vietcong Vietnam soldiers and Government officials who had been in jail were “smuggled in” among: civilian prisoners turned over to the Communists last month.
“I said to myself, ‘Cheer up, things could be worse,’ so I cheered up, and sure enough — things got worse.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12—South Vietnam appears unlikely to intervene militarily on behalf of the CamboIdian Government, informed official sources say.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese command today reported continued heavy clashes with Communist troops in the Central Highlands, the adjacent coastal lowlands and the Mekong Delta, below Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 13 (Reuters)—South Vietnam warned today that it would react if it considered itself threatened by North Vietnamese troops in Cambodia after the American bombing halt on Wednesday.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 13—This country's professional military men are going through a hard time. The Senate Armed Services Committee has shown that the Air Force secretly bombed Laos and Cambodia when both were (neutral countries. Similarly, the Marines crossed the border into Laos in early 1969 and engaged in secret, heavy fighting there.
Manila, Aug. 14 (UPI)—The 13th crew member of a United States navy vessel charged with disobeying orders while minesweeping off North Vietnam in March was found guilty as charged today and was sentenced to 75 days confinement at hard labor, Navy officials re ported.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 14 (AP) —Iran has been accepted as a member of the International Commission of Control and Supervision in Vietnam, the Iranian Ambassador, Ardeshir Zahedi, said today.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 15—Military experts here agree that the bombing of Cambodia—half a million tons in four and a half years—was the only thing that kept the Government of President Lon Nol from falling, and that it slowed the impetus of the enemy offensive and prevented the insurgent forces from massing in large enough numbers to take Phnom Penh. In short, their view is that the bomb ing gave the badly disorganized Government forces some breathing time. But Western military attaches also point out that it was the sheer massiveness — not necessarily the effectiveness—of the bombing that kept the enemy's hands off the capital. Whether it crippled the enemy's ability to take the country in the near future is quite a different question.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15—President Nixon marked the end of the American bombing in Cambodia with a new denunciation of Congress today for forcing the cutoff—an act that he said “undermines the prospects for world peace”—and with new warning to North Vietnam not to take military advantage of the cessation.
One day early in June 1972, people in central Saigon on their way home to lunch were startled by the sight of a large group of half ‐naked, darkskinned men, women and children fending their way through the tangle of motorcycles, pedicabs and cars. They were montagnards of the Stieng tribe located along the Cambodian border. For five days they had walked seventy miles from the vicinity of An Loc over the fields, avoiding embattled Route 13, to the capital city. Tired and without money, but clutching their machetes (essential in the jungles of the highlands as well as in the jungle of Saigon), they were on their way to the Ministry of Ethnic Minorities to seek help, which they immediately received.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15—President Nixon marked the end of the American bombing in Cambodia with a new denunciation of Congress today for forcing the cutoff—an act that he said “undermines the prospects for world peace“—and with a new warning to North Vietnam not to take military advantage of the cessation.
CAIRO, Aug. 16 — Egyptian Government sources today declined to confirm or deny an Israeli charge that 10 to 20 North Korean pilots were flying Egyptian military planes.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 16—The Defense Department said in a letter made public today that Saigon could legally use American‐supplied military equipment to attack North Vietnamese sanctuaries in neighboring Cambodia that posed a direct threat to South Vietnam.
Peace with more or less honor concludes the running battle between producer Joseph Papp and the Columbia Broadcasting System over the delayed presentation the TV version of “Sticks and Bones.” The controversial play about a blind Vietnam veteran home from the wars to a strained household and town will be broadcast over the C.B.S. network this evening—but only some Americans will be permitted to watch it and judge its worth for themselves. About half of C.B.S,'s affiliated stations have decided to black it out or to present it outside prime time.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Aug. 17 (Agence France‐Presse)—Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam returned here today from a five‐week trip‐to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 17 (AP) — Communist forces have stepped up probing attacks on the outer western and southern defense line of Hue, the South Vietnamese military command said today.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17—Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger called ‘Hanoi “the fountainhead of insurrection” in Southeast Asia today and said that the United States would support South Vietnamese forces from the air in the event of overt North Vietnamese aggression.”
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17—Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger called Hanoi “the fountainhead of insurrection” in Southeast Asia today, and said that the United States would support South Vietnamese forces from the air in the event of overt North Vietnamese aggression.”
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 18 (Reuters)—The Cambodian military command reported today that its troops had brought all highways leading from Phnom Penh under Government control for at least 20 miles from the capital.
NUOC YANG, South Vietnam, Aug. 16—For years the people of this tiny, remote hamlet about 40 miles north of Saigon lived at peace with the Vietcong guerrillas in the surrounding jungle.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 18 — More than four months after the departure of the last American troops, the United States remains the most vital lifeline to the military and economic stability of the South Vietnamese Government.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 19 ,(UPI) — Communist troops attacked Government positions outside the former imperial capital of Hue again today, but a spokesman for the military command said they were repulsed.

WASHINGTON, Aug. 20 Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that the Soviet Union's successful flighttesting Of a new missile system had made it a matter of “greater urgency” than before for Washington and Moscow to carry out their pledge to reach a treaty putting limits on offensive strategic weapons by the end of 1974.
Two religious social service agencies, one Protestant and the other Roman Catholic, have begun programs to arrange the adoption of South Vietnamese orphans by American couples.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 21 (Reuters)—The outer defense perimeter of the former imperial oity of Hue came under heavy sustained shelling by Communist gunners last night, the South Vietnamese military command said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 21 (UPI)—The South Vietnamese Government signed oil exploration contracts worth $16.8million initially today with three of four major companies granted permission to seek petroleum in the South China Sea.
To the Editor:
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 22 — In a series of press conferences held for visiting Thai journalists, the Cambodian Government today made clear its intention of seeking military aid from South Vietnam and Thailand as well as from the United States if the situation worsens in the months ahead.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 22 (AP) — Vietcong attack on a Government ranger position touched off the biggest battle in South Vietnam's Central Highlands region since the cease‐fire last January, the Saigon command reported today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug 22 (Reuters)—Five newsmen—one French and four West German—are believed to have been detained by the Vietcong north of Saigon today, South Vietnamese military spokesman here said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 23, (Reuters) — Communist troops fired more than 300 mortar shells into Government positions guarding the former imperial capital of Hue, the South Vietnamese command said today.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 23 (UPI) —A Federal judge declared unconstitutional today an Air Force regulation requiring servicemen to obtain permission from their commanders before they can collect signatures for a petition.
An American scientist who just returned from a 19‐day inspection trip to North Vietnam said yesterday that he was “embarrassed and saddened and numbed” by the bomb damage there.
SANTA FE, N. M., Aug. 23 (AP) — Col. James Lindberg Hughes of the Air Force, a former prisoner of war in North Vietnam, said last night that he would seek the Republican nomination for Governor of New Mexico in 1974.
Secretary of State‐designate Henry A. Kissinger struck just the right note yesterday with his promise to conduct a more open, bipartisan foreign policy “in full and new partnership with Congress.” If this revolutionary change in the Administration's approach to the conduct of foreign affairs receives full Presidential support, there is every reason for hope that the initial favorable Congressional response to Mr. Kissinger's nomination can be sustained, with long‐term benefits for American diplomacy.
GAINESVILLE, Fla., Aug. 23 — A police undercover agent told a jury here today how he infiltrated the Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Friday, Aug. 24 (AP)—Government troops have recaptured three positions important to the defense of the provincial capital of Kompong Speu and Phnom Penh's highway to the sea, the Cambodian military command reported yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 23 (Reuters)—A Vietcong spokesman said today that five European newsmen who were missing yesterday in a Vietcong zone north of Saigon were safe and being well treated.
Among the actions of the delegates to the American Legion convention in Honolulu was a resolution denouncing “persons for their actions and for their verbal attacks upon our prisoners of war.” An amendment naming Jane Fonda, the actress‐activist, as such a person was defeated. The legion. naires also named Clare Boothe Luce, the playwrightpolitician, as the winner of their Fourth Estate Award and passed a resolution wishing success to Clarence M. Kelley, the new director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
OPENING STATEMENT
MIAMI, Aug. 24 (AP)—A Federal judge has dropped the Republican National Committee and its chairman from a damage suit at the request of the antiwar activist who filed the suit. The suit by Kay Worden was against the committee, its former chairman, Senator Robert Dole of Kansas, the Fontainebleu Hotel and the Committee for the Re‐election of the President.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 24 Three high ‐ranking Foreigr Service officers, including a key assistant to Henry A. Kissinger during the Vietnam peace talks in Paris, were among 13 Gov ernment officials whose tele. phones were tapped on President Nixon's authority betweer 1969 and 1971, according to sources familiar with the open ation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 24 (UPI) — South Vietnamese units withstood a series of shelling attacks, brief firefights and mine traps during the 24‐hour period ended at noon today, the military command said. It said 38 Government soldiers and 19 Communist soldiers were killed in the fighting. Six civilians were also reported killed.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Aug. 25—The Laotian Government has received assurances from the Communist‐led Pathet Lao that all North Vietnamese troops will leave Laos if a final peace agreement is signed here, according to the Government's chief negotiator.The pledge was said to have been given before last Mondays abortive coup d'etat, but since then both the North Vietnamete and the Pathet Lao have said their policies remain unchanged.
KOMPONG TRACH, Cambodia, Aug. 25—Intense fighting between North Vietnamese and Cambodian Communist troops has been reported by Cambodian refugees coming into this remote area along the South Vietnamese border.
International Intense fighting between North Vietnamese and Cambodian Communist troops has been reported by refugees coming into Kompong Trach, a remote area in Cambodia along the South Vietnamese border. The refugees say the fighting was initiated by the Cambodian Communists after a conflict over scarce rice supplies and territorial control and has resulted in hundreds of casualties for the North Vietnamese and Cambodians. [Page 1, Column 8.]
TRENTON—The Legislature will he asked to provide an emergency program of longterm, low‐interest business loans for veterans of the Vietnam War era.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Aug. 26 (AP)—Seven persons were reported killed today in two attacks linked to South Vietnam's national Senate elections, a Government spokesman reported.
VIENTIANE—In recent months, as fighting raged in Cambodia and persisted in parts of Smith Vietnam, Laos seemed on the brink of peace. The Feh. 21 Laotian cease‐fire put an end to all but minor military incidents. The neutralist Prime Minister, Prince Souvanna Phouma, expressed readiness to make the military concessions that could bring about a peace agreement and coalition government with the Communist‐led Pathet Lao.
SAIGON, South Vietnam,, Aug. 25 (UPI) — South Vietnamese artillery fired 1,000 rounds into Communist gun positions around the former imperial capital of Hue today with a rumble that echoed from the walls of the city's ruined citadel.
To the Editor:
SAIZTON, Sout Vietnam, Aug. 25 (Reuters)—South Vietnam is mounting a diplomatic campaign for recognition among the countries of Africa and Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Aug. 27—South Vietnamese voters went dutifully to the polls yesterday in largely predetermined Senate election that has given President Nguyen Van Thieu a firm grasp on the legislature at the expense of his dwindling legal opposition.
COLUMBUS, Ohio—The revelation in recent days of clandestine crossborder operations by American ground troops in Cambodia, Laos and North Vietnam during the war reminds me once again that, somewhere in the United States, at least one Vietnam veteran has some important stories to tell.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 26 (UPI)—Nguyen Cao Ky, the former South Vietnamese Vice President, suffered deep cuts and was hospitalized Friday when a ladder fell on his head, friends said today. They said the accident had occurred while he was working on his farm, outside Saigon. He returned to his home in Saigon today.
Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger said yesterday that the United States had received periodic reports of fighting between North Vietnamese troops and Cambodian Communist forces.
HUE, South Vietnam—Almost 50 years after the reign of South Vietnam's last truly traditional Emperor, Khai Dinh, his queen and his chief concubines are still playing cards together and acting out a defunct court life.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 27 (Reuters) — Two proGovernment slates predictably swept yesterday's elections for the Souths Vietnamese Senate, giving President Nguyen Van Thieu a comfortable majority in the upper house, according to results made public today.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 27 (UPI)—Intense fighting was reported today along highways leading to Phnom Penh, and the road from the sea was cut for the second time in two days.
THUY TRUONG, South Vietnam, Aug. 22 — A disgruntled politician has launched a Red scare in this peaceful village of 5,091 persons, but no one is frightened.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 28 (AP) —The North Vietnamese have violated peace accords by transforming the former United States base at Khe Sanh in South Vietnam into a major military complex, Pentagon officials say.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 29 (Reuters)—Iran's participation in the Vietnam ceasefire commission began today with a small advance party of officers slipping quietly through a side entrance of Tan. Son Nhut Airport.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 29 (Reuters)—Five European newsmen returned from Vietcong zone north of Saigon in good health today after spending a week watching the life and activities of the Vietnamese Communists.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Aug. 30 (AP)—Vietcong troops have increased attacks southwest of Saigon in a drive to isolate the Mekong delta and its rice from the South Vietnamese capital, military sources said today.
HUE, South Vietnam, Aug. 23—Hue, which has known so much war, is at peace for the moment. But people seem anxious, waiting for some resolution of their ambiguous, precarious situation.
PEKING, Aug. 31 (UPI)—Prince Norodom Sihanouk today said that his Cambodian insurgents would open a fullscale attack on Phnom Penh in December with direct military support by North Vietnam.
Representative Mario Biaggi urged yesterday that the Labor Day holiday not only celebrate the working man but that it also be a “reflective time of concern for the plight of the unemployed Vietnam veterans.”
To THE EDITOR: SALLY QUINN and Hughes Rudd are so good that it wouldn't surprise me, a veteran TV viewer, to see them replace Walter Cronkite in an expanded daily hour‐long evening news series on CBS. With more interesting women's news‐type features replacing the drab features now filling the Cronkite show.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 1 (UPI)—South Vietnamese Government delegates boycotted five subcommission meetings of the Joint Military Commission today in what they said was a protest against Viet Cong impoliteness at a stormy meeting of the commission yesterday.
TAIPEI, Taiwan, Sept. 1—The United States Air Force has withdrawn a squadron of C‐130 transport planes from a base in central Taiwan, it was announced today, in the first reduction in the American military presence here since President Nixon's trip to China early last year.
PEKING, Sept. 1 (Reuters)—Prince Norodom Sihanouk took issue tonight with reports that forces loyal to him would open a full‐scale assault on Phnom Penh in December with direct military support from North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 2 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese Army today reported an attack on a militia outpost only 10 miles from Saigon beside Route 4 leading to the Mekong Delta.
To the Editor: I was greatly disappointed at the uncritical tenor of the Aug. 22 editorial in The Times on the proposed reconstruction of the West Side Highway.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 2 —Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the exiled Cambodian leader, said in an interview made public today that North Vietnam would supply ammunition to the antiGovernment forces in Cambodia, who would attack Phnom Penh sometime between December and next May.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 3—Three dissident labor leaders were sentenced to 18 months in jail by a military court today on charges of participation in a Communist plot to subvert the Saigon labor movement.
As one of Europe's traditional neutrals, Sweden has performed many mediatory and goodwill missions in the intérnational community. More recently the Swedish Government has ventured at times to act as a moral spokesman. Thus, last December Prime Minister Olof Palme was particularly forceful in expressing the outrage and dismay which many Europeans felt at the renewed United States bombing of North Vietnam only a few weeks after the Nixon Administration had announced that “peace is at hand.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 4 (Reuters)—Vietcong and South Vietnamese military negotiators met today for the first time in four days, averting the threat of a complete breakdown in talks to carry out the Paris peace agreement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 5 (AP)—The United States today charged North Vietnam and the Vietcong with deliberately holding back information on missing Americans and delaying the return of the remains of United States prisoners of war buried in the North.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Aug. 30 — Andre Malraux slept there. Graham Greene's quiet American had a fateful encounter on its terrace. During the Communists' 1968 Tet offensive, American journalists took refuge in its hallways.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 5 (UPI) — Retired Gen. Duong Van Minh, a former South Vietnamese leader, attacked both the Government and the Communists today for keeping political prisoners behind bars despite the Jan. 28 peace accord.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Sept. 7 (UPI)—Government and Communist troops battled for 19 hours along the defense perimeter protecting the provincial capital of Kontum yesterday and more heavy fighting was reported 75 miles to the east on the central coast.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 6 (UPI) — A squadron of F105 jets whose sophisticated radar once sought out North Vietnamese missile sites left today to begin the second phase of American withdrawals from Thailand.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 6 (Reuters) — The Government today devalued the piaster — for the fifth time this year — to 510 to the dollar, from 500.
CAN THO, South Vietnam, Sept. 1—In a muddy field beside the Bassac River here, 50 Japanese engineers are quietly erecting a large power plant that will eventually provide electricity to two‐thirds of the populous Mekong Delta.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 7 (Reuters)—South Vietnamese officials warned newsmen today that weekly news conferences with the Vietcong would be stopped if there was any exchange of materials with Vietcong officials.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 7—South Vietnamese artillery opened fire before dawn today on a company of about 100 Vietcong soldiers assembling 12 miles west of Saigon, the Government announced.
CAN THO, South Vietnam, Sept. 1—In a muddy field beside the Bassac River here, 50 Japanese engineers are quietly erecting a large power plant that will eventually provide electricity to two‐thirds of the populous Mekong Delta.
BOSTON, Sept. 8 (AP) —Vietnam veterans could attend summer and evening classes without cost at Massachusetts comunity colleges under a bill that received initial approval Thursday in the State Senate.
ALGIERS, Sept. 8—The developing nations of the world sought today to put some teeth into three days of speechmaking in favor of their political and economic independence from the industrialized countries.
BOSTON, Sept. 8 (AP)—Vietnam veterans could attend summer and evening classes without cost at Massachusetts comunity colleges under a bill that received initial approval Thursday in the State Senate.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 8 (UPI)—Fighting flared in South Vietnam's Central Highlands today, and combat action throughout the nation was reported to have increased in the last few days.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 8 — Fighting between North Vietnamese troops and Cambodian Communists is continuing in southeasten Cambodia despite attempts by some senior officials of both sides to stop it, American intelligence sources said today.
A German nurse who survived four years of North Vietnamese captivity recalled here yesterday how she passed the time in a wooden hut with dreams of building schools and hospitals.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 9 (UPI)—A South Vietnamese military spokesman said that truce violations by the Communists dropped below 100 for the first time in three days today but that Government casualties rose.
WASHINGTON—How much shock, surprise and bad news can a nation absorb and still maintain its position as a world leader? Many concerned Americans are asking questions similar to this and for a very good reason.
MOSCOW, Sept. 11 — The novelist Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn has accused Western liberals of dual standards of morality in what he described as their quick readiness to denounce oppression in rightist countries but reluctance to criticize the Soviet Union.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Sept. 11— The United States and South Vietnam have issued parallel protests over reports that North Vietnam is repairing and improving 12 formerly American airfields now in Vietcong territory.
BRIGHTON, Colo., Sept. 11 (AP) — A coroner's jury, ruling today that an accused former prisoner of war had committed suicide, criticized the military service for its handling of the case.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 1 —Tran Thi Nga is waiting She is Vietnamese, and al though she has lived most of her 23 years in Laos, where her family took refuge in 1960, she yearns to go home to Vietnam. 
SANTA FE, N. M., Sept. 12 (AP)—Attorney General David Norvell says that James Hughes, a former Vietnam pris oner of war, is eligible to run for Governor. 
In trying to assess the impact of Vietnam and Water gate, Henry Kissinger told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: “These traumatic events have cast lengthen ing shadows on our traditional optimism and self‐esteem. ... Where‐we once ran the risk of thinking we were too good for the world, we might now swing to believing we are not good enough. Where once a soaring optimism tempted us to dare too much, a shrinking spirit could lead us to attempt too little.” 
The Senate confirmed Pres ident Nixon's nomination of Alvin J. Arnett as director of the Office of Economic Op portunity by a vote of 88 to 3. During the hearings on his nomination, Mr. Arnett, who is 38 years old, said he supported the poverty agen cy's goals and that he ex pected O.E.O. to spend the money appropriated for it by Congress. The Nixon Ad ministration had sought to dismantle the agency and did not ask for any funds for it in the 1974 budget. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 12 (UPI) — Government troops yesterday fought Com munist forces in a six‐hour bat tle for control of crucial Route 1 on the Central Coast, the South Vietnamese command said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 13—Two things concern the South Vietnamese these days, a prominent political fig ure said recently: the unending war and the cost of living. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 13 (Reuters) — The South Vietnamese command reported a battle today in the central coastal province of Binh Dinh. 
In Cambodia it is still civil war. In South Vietnam there is indecision. Only in Laos, third of the Indochina states, has a widely heralded cease‐fire turned into formal peace—signed and sealed yesterday. 
To the Editor: Recently Dr. I. D. J. Bross in a letter suggested that in association with proposed nuclear power plant at York, Pa., and “other affected areas” health‐surveillance system should be set up “so we could at least get an early warning of any serious hazards,” presumably arising from the radiation emitted by the proposed and other operational power plants. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Sept, 15—The South Vietnamese command today repopted a fierce battle on the main coastal highway in which it said 90 Communist soldiers had been killed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 12 — Fragmented and gloomy, the non‐Communist political opposition to President Nguyen Van Thieu now feels itself virtually helpless.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 14— The Senate Foreign Relations Committee was urged by a variety of political groups to day to reject Henry A. Kis singer's nomination as Secre tary of State for reasons rang ing from his Vietnam policy to his Jewish background.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 15 — Senate liberals are planning a major floor fight to delete all support for South Vietnam's police force and prison system from the pending foreign aid bill. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 15 Reuters) — Senior army offi cers reacted coolly today to the new Laotian peace agree ment, and said real peace q,ould not he established un less North Vietnamese troops withdrew from Laos. 
Senate liberals, accusing the Ninon Admin istration of covering up the full extent of United States aid to South Vietnam's police force and prison system, are planning a major floor fight to delete all, police sup port froth the pending foreign aid bill. The legislation, which now, provides for $376‐ million in economic aid for Southeast Asia —about half of the funds sought by the Ad ministration—is scheduled for a Senate vote next week. Many Senators reportedly ex pressed willingness to delete police and prison support from the bill. At issue is growing public, evidence that political op ponents of the Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu are still being jailed and tortured. [Page 1, Column. 8.].
VIENTIANE—It had often been said that if Laos were left alone, the tiny nation would find peace by itself. The parties to its 20‐year civil war, the argument went, were more proxies for the North Vietnamese and the French (and then the Americans) than genuine enemies in their own right. 
BOSTON, Sept. 15 (AP)—The state would pay the tuition for Vietnam veterans to attend evening and summer classes at community colleges under a measure that received final ap proval Thursday in the Massa chusetts Senate.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 16 (AP)—Communist sol diers killed two soldiers, wounded eight more and in jured 10 civilians today when they fired two mortar rounds into a military position near Tam Quan, the military com mand reported. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 17—Lam is an epileptic and mentally retarded, but he was drafted into the South Vietnamese Army anyway be cause his family could not afford the bribe demanded by Government officials to certify him as unfit. Now, a year later, Lam has finally been discharged after his father went into debt to raise the million piasters ($2,000) the of ficials wanted. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 17— A coalition of antiwar and church groups opened the In ternational Days of Concern for South Vietnamese Political Prisoners here today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Sept. 20 (AP)—The South Vietnamese Government today charged Hanoi with making “intensive warlike prep arations to reopen hostilities' in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 19 — The Nixon Administration or dered a high‐ranking. F.B.I. of ficial to follow Joseph Kraft, the syndicated columnist, to Paris in 1969 and to arrange with the French government to keep him under electronic and physical surveillance during the visit, according to sources familiar with the operation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 19—Well‐informed Amer ican sources said today that the Government was planning to release one of its leading critics in a move apparently designed to counter recent un favorable publicity about Sai gon's treatment of political prisoners.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 20—The Government announced today that it had decided to release from pris on Mrs. Ngo Ba Thanh, a leading critic of the war and the Government, and three dis sident labor leaders. 
The surtax plan revealed by Melvin Laird merits support. The fast rise of inflation can no longer be stated in exact figures. How far the tremendous rise of international commodity prices and the devaluation and shaky posi tion of the dollar will carry our price level, no one can predict. 
TOKYO, Sept. 21 — Japan and North Vietnam established diplomatic relations today, giv ing the North Vietnamese the political prestige of recognition by Asia's strongest non‐Com munist power. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 21—Mrs. Ngo Ba Thanh, one of the sharpest critics of the Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu, and three independent‐minded labor lead ers returned today from prison to their homes and families. 
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept 22 — A South Korean Cabinet Minister and a pro‐Government legislator assailed the Japanese press today for the way it re ported on the abduction of a Korean opposition politician from Tokyo to Seoul.
SEVERAL years ago, when protest against Ameri can involvement in Vi etnam was hottest, sev eral protesters, myself in cluded, stood on the balcony that overlooks the floor of the New York Stock Ex change and tore dollar hills into pieces. As the tiny green slivers dropped to the floor, we shouted our indignation at those who “made money off the war.” And we prayed. We prayed for the souls of those brokers and the bodies and souls of those being bombed in Vietnam. We be lieved all right, 
WASHINGTON—The figures pouring from the Pentagon on enlistment for the volunteer forces point to an in escapable conclusion: Not enough men are being recruited to fill out even the attenuated Army and Marine Corps of the post‐Vietnam military establish ment. 
WHATEVER happened to the television variety show? A profound question doubtlessly deserves a profound answer but let's resist, just this once, tampering with Vietnam or Kennedy‐Johnson Nixon or moon shots or Watergate or the now‐that‐I've lost‐my‐innocence‐I'm‐gonna‐be‐a‐mean‐mother blues.
SAIGON, South Vietnam— In the nineteen‐sixties the small program seemed like a humane counterpoint to the fury of the war. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 22 (UPI)—Fighting in the high lands north of Saigon and the Mekong Delta to the south has caused the deaths of 151 Com munists and 23 Government soldiers between dawn yester day and noon today, the Gov ernment command said. 
Here is an alarming little news story. It is about eight men who went to Florida in 1972 with a mind to stage some sort of protest against the Vietnam war.
Foreign Minister Nguyen Phu Duc of South Vietnam defended his Government yesterday against reports that it was cor rupt and repressive.
TEMPLE, Tex., Sept. 24 (UPI) — Quintuplets, three girls and two boys, were born to a Cam eron, Tex., housewife tonight, but all five died within an hour.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 24 (Reuters)—Communist troops overran a Government base camp in the Central High lands during the weekend and the retreating Government rangers have been out of con tact for nearly two days, mili tary sources said today.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 24 (UPI) — North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troops attacked at least three Government posi tions in the first reported Com munist violation of the Laotian peace accords signed on Sept. 14, the Defense Ministry said today.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 24—E. Howard Hunt Jr. said today that he had fabricated State Depart ment cables to show a link be tween President Kennedy and the assassination of the Presi dent of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, a Roman Coholic, to estrange Catholic voters tram the Democratic party.
Arthur R. Taylor, president of the Columbia Broadcasting System said yesterday he planned to speak out this fall on television's rights under the First Amendment, on TV's re sponsibility to the public and on “what dangers we see in Government regulation.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Sept. 26 (Reuters) — The Saigon military Com mand said today that the North Vietnamese Army had used tanks to overrun a ranger base camp in the Central Highlands —the first direct tank assault reported since the ceasefire in January. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 25 — A Veterans Administration of ficial told a House subcommit tee today that “the majority of Vietnam era veterans are better off today” in terms of educational benefits than World War II or Korean vet erans.
To the Editor:The “infinitesimal risk” of cancer caused by nuclear power plants claimed in his Sept. 14 letter by Dr. L. D. Hamilton of the Brookhaven National Laboratory (an institution funded by the Atomic Energy. Commission) replete with glaring flaws in logic. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 (AP) —Navy Secretary John R. Warner has dropped the miscon duct charges brought against two former prisoners of war by Admiral James B. Stockdale, a Pentagon source said tonight. 
To the Editor: The concern of the Government with the monopolistic position of I.B.M. in the computer field is a clas sic example of doing the right thing for the wrong reason. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 26 — South Vietnamese, fighter planes have attacked North‐Vietnamese tanks that overran an isolated South Vietnamese ranger outpost in the Central Highlands, accord ing to military sources. 
WASHINGTON—There are more political prisoners in South Vietnam today than in any nation in the world. Amnesty International estimates that there are 100,000. This is three times its 31,000 estimate for the Soviet Union, Brazil, Turkey, Spain, Ceylon, Portugal, Angola, Mozambique, Czech oslovakia, East Germany and South Africa combined. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26— President Nixon personally or dered his White House aides to attempt to persuade news men that Mayor Lindsay's re election in 1969 was based on local issues, and not the Mayor's opposition to the Viet nam war. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27—Though the Senate voted the other day to cut United States military forces overseas by 40 per cent, and then reversed itself under intense pressure from the White House, that challenge to the present balance or power in the world has sent a shudder through the Ad ministration and the Western alliance. And late yesterday, the Senate again voted for a large cut‐23 per cent, or 110,000 of 471,000 land‐based troops.
PUTNEY, Vt.—This past summer E. W. Pfeiffer of the University, of Montana and I were invited to the Democratic Republic of (North] Vietnam on a mission for the Scientists' Institute for Public Information, in behalf of its new task force on scientific aid for Indochina. While there we were asked by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam (the Vietcong) to make a preliminary assessment of the scientific needs of South Vietnam. We were the first Americans to have been invited into that portion of South Vietnam under P.R.G. control.
CAN THO, South Vietnam, Sept. 20 — It is harvest time in the outwardly placid, deepgreen Mekong Delta, and there is a silent war on.
BEIRUT, Lebanon, Sept. 29 (UPI) — The Iraqi Government today lifted the curfew imposed yesterday on Baghdad and apparently ended a sweeping security crackdown. One Beirut newspaper reported thousands of arrests in a hunt for a hatchet murderer that brought on the crackdown.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 29—“Nguyen goes,” according to the 19th‐century poet Trang Trinh, “and Nguyen comes back again.”
E. Howard Hunt Jr., of recent Watergate notoriety, has written a fascinating, highly personal and, at times, rather eloquent defense of himself and of the Central Intelligence Agency during the resounding bungle of the Bay of Pigs in April, 1961. It goes without saying that Hunt continues to justify the attempted overthrow of Fidel Castro's Government by the Kennedy Administration with an invading Cuban refugee brigade. Hunt's contempt is reserved, instead, for those who have “always cringed from American exercise of power in our national selfinterest.” In the wake of the far more monumental American fiasco in Vietnam, Hunt's basic assumptions will no longer win wide support.
