HARRISBURG, Pa., March 31—About 30 demonstrators were seized by the military police today after they scaled the fence of the New Cumberland Army Depot near here in attempts to plant small trees. However, no charges were filed and all were released within hours and the remaining demonstrators also were expected to be freed. Charges had not been filed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, April 1—The United States command announced yesterday that an American fighter‐bomber shot down MIG‐21 jet fighter over North Vietnamese territory near the Laotian border Thursday afternoon.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 17 — The Ho Chi Minh Trial starts in Hanoi. Every day hundreds of heavily laden trucks leave the capital to begin the drive of more than 300 miles through Laos and into South Vietnam.
SAIGON, Smith Vietnam, Saturday, April 1—North Vietnamese gunners attacked three South Vietnamese army positions in Tayninh province west of Saigon this morning, as the heavy fighting south of the demilitarized zone spread to other areas of the country.
To the Editor: Your March 16 news story of Admiral Thomas H. Moorer's visit to Princeton University did not capture the significance of the event. The visit by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs to the university campus was an important test of whether “the winding down” rhetoric has really worked with young people in this country.
For some months now, the American pullout from South Vietnam has been setting the stage for a critical potential test. American ground troops, their number down below 100,000 and being reduced at a rate of 1,000 a day, are no longer in a position to do much more than defend their own shrinking perimeters. With only United States air power being left behind for support, would the South Vietnamese army hold the line if the North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces launched another major offensive?
PHILADELPHIA, April 1—After setbacks in numerous court cases around the country, antiwar activists scored a preliminary victory this week in challenging the legality of the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, April 1 —United States Government analysts said today that they saw three principal objectives behind the enemy offensive in the northern part of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 1 (AP)—The Defense Minister, Lieut. Gen. Nguyen Van Vy, asked today for a leave of absence from his post while an investigation of charges of mismanagement of a mandatory military retirement fund was under way.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 2—Thousands of North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops have driven past South Vietnam's northern line of defenses below the demilitarized zone and are pushing South Vietnamese forces in disarray toward their rear bases, United States military sources in Danang said yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 1 — South Vietnam's northern line of defense, which enemy forces were pressing this weekend, is a 40‐mile strip of sandy coastal plain, grassy foothills and rugged, junglecovered mountains. It has long been the arena of battles between allied troops holding the line and North Vietnamese troops trying to infiltrate the south.
HARRISBURG, Pa., April 1—Thousands of demonstrators marched on the State Capitol today for a rally called as climax to the week‐long antiwar protests here.
To the Editor: That President Nixon is recalling American ground forces from Vietnam is certainly commendable even if the policy is seen as determined primarily by its effect on Mr. Nixon's political prospects.
SAIGON, South Vietnam April 1 — University and school students, who make’ President Nguyen Van most vocal opposition days, charge that their have been disappearing the streets and ending up prison.
WASHINGTON, April 2 (AP) —Senator J. W. Fulbright said today that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee would use the Pentagon papers as the basis for hearings on foreign policy decisions leading to United States involvement in the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, Monday, April 3 (UPI)—President Nguyen Van Thieu flew north to the combat zone this morning. Before leaving, he sent a brief message to the opening session of the National Asembly. It said: The military situation at the Demilitarized Zone in the past two days has become intense. I am watching it carefully and will report to you later.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 2—American military and civilian officials in Saigon reacted calmly today to the North Vietnamese offensive below the demilitarized zone, many adopting the attitude, “It's a South Vietnamese operation now and we're going to leave it to them.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 3—South Vietnamese forces abandoned the northern half of Quangtri Province yesterday to a North Vietnamese force, estimated at 12,000 to 15,000 men, that was still advancing southward behind tanks and intense artillery barrages. But while the cloud cover that has thwarted effective air support of the South Vietnamese remained, United States B‐52's dropped hundreds of tons of bombs through it yesterday.
WASHINGTON, April 2 —Senior Administration officials asserted today that North Vietnam's offensive across the demilitarized zone was a clear violation of the 1968 understanding that produced an end to the systematic American bombing of North Vietnam and the start of substantive talks in Paris on concluding the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, Monday, April 3 (Reuters) — The United States Ambassador to South Vietnam, Ellsworth Bunker, has cut short a holiday trip to Nepal to return to Saigon, Embassy officials said today. He is expected back tomorrow.
HONG KONG, April 2 —Hanoi's official press agency today quoted North Vietnam's Defense Minister, Gen, Vo Nguyen Giap, as calling on “the Vietnam people's armed forces” to march forward to “complete victory,” in what appeared to be an oblique reference to the offensive drives in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 3 —The United States accused Hanoi today of launching an “invasion” of Smith Vietnam and said Washington was leav ing open all retaliatory options —including renewed American bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 3 (UPI)—The United States command announced to day that the number of Amer ican servicemen in Vietnam was cut back by 6,200 last week, to 95,500 men, almost a seven‐year low.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 3—The director of the National Press Center warned the Vietnamese press today that it must print only official Government versions of the battles in Quangtri Province.
DONGHA, South Vietnam, April 3 (Reuters)—Pigs, sniff ing around the corpses of North Vietnamese soldiers, were the only things moving today in this battered town in the middle of the North Vietnamese offensive below the demilitarized zone.
North Vietnam would accept a three‐part coalition govern ment in the South, according to three American labor leaders who met recently in Hanoi with Le Due Tho, a senior negotiator at the Paris peace talks.
WASHINGTON, April 3 —Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, asked the United States District Court here today to order the Penta gon to release the report of the Army's confidential investiga tion of the mass Slayings at Mylai.
Two weeks after President Nixon suspended the Paris peace talks, Communist forces in Indochina have hurled a severe challenge against Mr. Nixon's alternate strategy for disengagement through “Vietnamization.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 4—The United States command marshaled an armada of hundreds of B‐52 bombers and fighter planes today, poised for possible strikes against North Vietnam and against its 15,000‐man force pouring into South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 3—The power ful North Vietnamese offensive across the demilitarized zone into Quangtri Province illustrates at once the weak ness of the so‐called Vietnamization program and the paradox of President Nixon's domestic political position.
Three Democratic Presidential candidates, appearing together on a television program as the polls opened in the Wisconsin primary, agreed yesterday that President Nikon would be justified in ordering a new bombing assault on North Vietnam to protect the remaining ,American forces in the South.
NEW HAVEN, April 4.—Gen. William Westmoreland canceled a planned address to the Yale Political Union last night as 600 loud and occasionally violent demonstrators swarmed into the Yale Law School, where the speech was scheduled.
WASHINGTON, April 4—The United States tonight ordered the deployment of 10 to 20 more B‐52 bombers to Indochina to strengthen, the American ability to respond to the new North Vietnamese offensive.
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 4 (Agence France‐Presse) —Quangbinh, the North Vietnamese province bordering on the demilitarized zone, has been placed in a state of alert, the North Vietnamese press agency reported today.
HONG KONG, Wednesday, April 5—Hanoi has declared that threats to bomb North Vietnam could not blunt the Communist forces “determination to fight and to win” the war in Vietnam.
The Pentagon Papers—a richly documented record of the American role in Indochina from World War to May 1968—tell different stories, teach different lessons to different readers. Some claim they have only now understood that Vietnam was the “logical” outcome of the cold war or the anti‐Communist ideology, others that this is a unique opportunity to learn about decision‐making processes in government, but most readers have by now agreed that the basic issue raised is deception.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 4—As the latest North Vietnamese drive in South Vietnam unfolds, American’ intelligence experts are being proved correct in their predictions that big offensive was in the making.
WASHINGTON — The new U. S. Pacific strategy, readjusting this country's own defenses and its military relations with Asian allies, is now perceptibly taking shape. The strategy became inevitable after the Nixon Doctrine was announced and following subsequent force reductions in South Vietnam, reversion of Okinawa to Japan and the altered status of Taiwan.
Quangtri is a small and somewhat Scruffy town, city in name only, with no Strategic value. It has considerable psychological importance because it is the capital of South Vietnam's northernmost province.
WASHINGTON, April 4 (UPI) —Vice President Agnew will go to Fort Campbell, Ky., Thursday to attend a welcome home ceremony for the 101st Airborne Division, which has served in Vietnam since 1965. Mr. Agnew will be filling in for President Nixon who was unable to attend. The White House said the President's decision had nothing to do with the current Communist offensive in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 4—The Wisconsin primary has dramatized once more the disarray and suicidal tendencies of the Democratic party, but the Republicans are not quite as jubilant as they sound. Rising food prices, the unemployment index, the continued weakness of the dollar and the latest Crisis in Vietnam are all keeping them from getting too chesty,
PARIS, April 4 — North Vietnam and the Vietcong sought today to reopen the suspended peace talks but were indignantly turned down by the United States and South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 5 — South Vietnamese troops abandoned one of their remaining defense points on the north bank of the Cua Viet last night and North Vietnamese tanks were reported moving south toward the embattled city of Quangtri, capital of South Vietnam's northernmost province.
WASHINGTON, April 4 (AP) —The National Peace Action Coalition today called its national steering committee into emergency session in New York next Sunday to act on what it called President Nixon's move to escalate the war in Vietnam. The coalition said the Tout” of South Vietnamese troops “has thrown the Nixon Administration into state of panic.”
HUE, South Vietnam, April 4 —South Vietnamese Boy and Girl Scouts and college students joined with social workers today in an effort to aid the masses of refugees who have fled here to avoid the intensive North Vietnamese attacks around their homes in Quangtri Province.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 6 (AP)—The United States Command reported today that a Marine lieutenant had been killed in the North Vietnamese offensive below the demilitarized zone and a Marine corporal was missing. The command said that the two men were members of a naval gunfire spotter team based at Outpost Alpha 2 when it was attacked by the North Vietnamese April 1.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 6—North Vietnamese troops reportedly opened a new drive in South Vietnam yesterday, striking in Binhlong Province, 75 miles north of Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 5 — With the use of artillery, tanks and mobile antiaircraft defenses in their current drive across the demilitarized zone, the North Vietnamese, it is clear, have opened a large new phase of the war centering on conventional combat.
HONG KONG, Thursday, April 6—China asserted today that any counterattack by the United States against the new Communist offensive in South Vietnam would “bring more disastrous failure” upon the Americans and the Saigon Government forces.
QUANGTRI, South Vietnam, April 5 (AP)—The commander of South Vietnamese forces battling below the demilitarized zone said today that he could defend Quangtri unless the enemy brought in more troops.
WASHINGTON, April 5—High officials said the Nixon Administration was weighing three potential target areas in North Vietnam today as a decision neared on whether to expand the air war there.
WASHINGTON, April 5 — S. Sgt. Donald L. Fryer told a Senate subcommittee today that he was put into a “detoxification unit” in Vietnam and held behind barbed wire for 10 days after an Army urinalysis machine mistakenly identified him as a drug user.
NEW HAVEN, Conn. — The Javits war‐powers bill confirms Oliver Wendell Holmes’ quip that “great cases like hard cases make bad law” more vividly than any proposal since that of the Bricker Amendment. Responding to Vietnam, the Javits bill would radically change the constitutional relationship between Congress and the Presidency in making foreign policy. Ignoring their own repeated votes, for Vietnam, the sponsors contend that the cause of the Vietnam tragedy is a modem usurpation or the war power by the President. As Senator. Cooper points out, this claim rewrites history.
WASHINGTON, April 5 —Although they have yet to say so in public, the Administration's top policymakers view the current North Vietnamese offensive as an all‐out effort by Hanoi to discredit the Vietnamization program and shatter South Vietnam's political and military morale. The Administration's spokesmen have avoided any definitivepublic characterization of the attacks, but privately officials here indicate that they are struck by the degree to which the North Vietnamese have committed themselves.
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 5 (Agence France‐Presse)—The focus in the Hanoi press today appeared to be the potential for mutiny in the South Vietnamese Army and insurrection in the cities.
AUSTIN, Tex., April 5 (AP)—Paula Holt, whose plight elicited more than $30,000 in donations from American soldiers in Vietnam, died today in San Francisco, one month after receiving a kidney transplant. Miss Holt, 18 years old, was the third child in her family to die as a result of an inherited kidney disease, acute familial nephritis.
WASHINGTON, April 5 (UPI) — A dozen House Democrats warned today against any United States retaliation against North Vietnam.
HONG KONG, April 5 (Reuters) — North Vietnam said today that it had shot down a second B‐52 bomber in an air raid over North Vietnamese territory. A broadcast said the craft was downed at Vinhlinh, just north of the demilitarized zone.
WASHINGTON, April 5—The Defense Department categorically denied today that the North Vietnamese had shot down a B‐52 bomber.
The spreading Communist offensive in South Vietnam finally brings to a head the inherent contradictions the Indochina policy followed by the Nixon Administration for the last three years.
HONG KONG, Friday, April 7—Hanoi today denounced the United States decision, to resume bombing North Vietnam and ordered North Vietnamese armed forces to “deal thunder blows at the enemy” by “shooting down many aircraft, capturing many pilots and sinking many U. S. warships.”
PARIS, April 6—Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, the chief Vietcong delegate to the peace talks here, said today that “Popular Liberation” forces were fighting to “free all of South Vietnam” and establish a “government of national concord” in Saigon.
WASHINGTON, April 6—Antiwar leaders announced plans today for new demonstrations and said that the increased American bombing in North Vietnam could lead to a “massive outpouring in the streets.”
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 6 (Agence France‐Presse) —Alarm bells rang for an air raid practice here today, sending factory workers to stations on the roofs where they took up positions behind heavy machine guns.
WASHINGTON, April 6—Le Duc Tho, a member of the North Vietnamese Politburo, has sent word to President Nixon through a delegation of American labor leaders that he would like to resume his secret peace negotiations with Henry A. Kissinger, Congressional sources said today.
PARIS, April 6—North Vietnam issued a statement here claiming 10 American planes downed in its territory today. The delegation joined the Vietcong delegation in denouncing the American air attacks on the North as “a new military venture of extreme gravity.”
WASHINGTON, April 6‐Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today that air strikes in North Vietnam would reach farther north than 40 to 50 miles from the border, the area in which the first strikes took place today.
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
DONGHA, South Vietnam, April 6 (AP)—Seven civilian newsmen were among more than a dozen persons wounded when mortar shells hit a tank battalion command post here today.
WASHINGTON, April 6—The Communists in Vietnam are now trying to win the war in one decisive stroke, as they defeated the French in the battle of Dienbienphu in 1954. It is a bold but puzzling strategy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, April 7 —Hundreds of American Air Force and Navy fighter‐bombers struck for the second day today at North Vietnamese troop concentrations and surface‐to‐air missile sites as clear weather permitted heavy air attacks both above and below the demilitarized zone.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 6 (AP)—The United States command reported today that 10 Americans were killed in combat in Indochina last week, the highest weekly toll in six months. Fifteen Americans were listed as missing or captured as a result of air crashes last week.
DONGHA, South Vietnam, April 6—No one is sure how many North Vietnamese are fighting on this front, but estimates run from 10,000 to 40,000. From evidence observed today, there must be many.
DONGHA, South Vietnam, April 7—North Vietnam's attack on Quangtri Province appears to be angering many people of this devastated region and stirring rarely displayed feelings of patriotism. The South Vietnamese, 100,000 of whom have fled their homes, are angry because they consider the attacks—by tens of thousands of men backed by tanks and heavy artillery—are no longer part of the traditional’ conflict between different groups of South Vietnamese for control of the country, but an outright invasion.
DANANG, South Vietnam, April 7 (Reuters)—The only road link between North and South Vietnam, the Benhai bridge, has been destroyed by American planes, a senior United States officer said today.
LONDON, April 7—The Nixon withdrawal from Vietnam has always had something of an illusory character. While American ground troops left, other military involvement continued or intensified. From carriers and from enlarged bases in Thailand, American bombers attacked Laos and both parts of Vietnam. American planes and supplies supported a larger war effort in Cambodia. The phantom C.I.A. army fought in Laos.
PARIS, April 7—North Vietnam appealed to France today to try to halt American bombing of its territory.
MOSCOW, April 7 (Reuters) —The Soviet leaders today used the occasion of the North Vietnamese Communist party chief's 65th birthday to reassure him of continuing support from Moscow.
WASHINGTON, April 7 ‐President Nixon has so far maintained silence on the stepped‐up fighting in Vietnam to avoid creating a crisis atmos‐1 phere and to keep alive all diplomatic options, including his plan to visit Moscow, next month, Administration officials, said today.
HUE, South Vietnam, April — More than 100,000 people have been driven from their homes in the frontier province of Quangtri since the North Vietnamese opened their offensive there nine days ago.
SAIGON, April 7 (AP) — An American adviser was wounded during the evacuation by helicopter of the 15‐man advisory team from Anloc, the provincial capital just to the south of Locninh. His identification was withheld pending notification of his family.
WASHINGTON, April 7—Until a week ago, it would have been the most natural thing in the world for President Nixon to fly yesterday to Fort Campbell, Ky., to welcome home the 101st Airborne Division and to thank them for staying the course in Vietnam while he gradually turned the fighting over to the South Vietnamese. But Mr. Nixon found himself in Philadelphia yesterday morning address ing Roman Catholic educators, and one of the reasons for the change in schedule was the conclusion in the White House that a testimonial to the effectiveness of the Vietnamization program might seem oddly inappropriate at the moment.
DANANG, South Vietnam, April 7—The Danang air base, which has been greatly reduced in size as a result of the American withdrawals, reflected in capsule form today the heightened tempo of the Vietnam war.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 7 (UPI) —The United States command announced today the withdrawal of 130 American servicemen from South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 7 —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that heavy bombing of North Vietnam would continue until it withdrew the tanks and troops that crossed into South Vietnam last (week and showed interest in “serious” peace talks.
HONG KONG, April 7—The Hanoi radio reported today that three more American planes had been shot down in North ‘Vietnam and said that Communist forces had inflicted heavy I casualties on South Vietnamese troops in capturing Locninh,

SAIGON, Saturday, April (AP)—Thirty‐six United States Marine Corps F‐4 Phantoms arrived today at Danang as emergency reinforcements for the American air effort to halt North Vietnam's general offensive. The jet fighter‐bombers are part of the First Marine Air Wing, based at. Iwakuni, Japan, with some units stationed at OkinaWa.
This book is bad history, but in its own way, a good memoir, for it tells a great deal about Gen. Maxwell Taylor and those other statesmen of the 1960's who led us into the Indochina war. Taylor's account of some of the events of that period, such as the involvement of the Kennedy Administration in the overthrow of the late President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam, is so at variance with the documentary record now available to us in the Pentagon Papers and elsewhere that the kindest description one can give his version is to say that it reflects the wish‐think reconstruction of the past in which men of power are prone to indulge themselves in their memoirs.
MOSCOW, April 8—Secretary of Agriculture Earl L. Butz arrived here late today for highlevel talks that will open negotiations for regular longterm sales of American grain to the Soviet Union.
PALO ALTO, Calif. April 8 (UPI)—Vice President Agnew, foiling antiwar demonstrators by showing up unannounced hours early, lashtd out today at what he called “cynical and liberal elitists,” including Democratic candidates, The Washington Post and the late H. L. Mencken.
To the Editor:
CHONTHANH, South Vietnam, April 8— The survival of South Vietnam's surrounded Fifth Division and control of the northwestern approaches to Saigon appeared to be in the balance tonight as the opposing forces positioned themselves for a major battle.
DECATUR, Ga., April 8 (AP)—Dean Rusk, the former Secretary of State, said today that the American public should be prepared for “bad news” as North Vietnam continued its offensive in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 8—The Nixon Administration received word overnight that North Vietnam has committed its last remaining “home division” to the invasion of South Vietnam. The report has reinforced the conviction of top Government strategists here that Hanoi's “one last throw of the dice” in the war is meant to be the prelude to serious negotiations, possibly even before President Nixon leaves for Moscow late in May.
MIAMI, April 8—The White House said today that the United States would do “what is necessary” in terms of air power, fire poir‐er and logistical support to help South Vietnamese forces stop the enemy's current offensives, but it appeared to rule out the use of American ground forces.
NEAK LUONG, Cambodia, April 8 (AP)—Cambodian troops and South Vietnamese armor were reported today to have reopened the main PnompenhSaigon road to traffic as far as the Cambodian provincial capital of Svayrieng.
HONG KONG, April 8—Nhan Dan, Hanoi's official daily newspaper, today described the situation in South Vietnam as an “all‐round offensive” and reported a string of Communist victories.
SAIGON— It was clearly the beginning of an all‐out effort by the 160,000 North Vietnamese regulars in South Vietnam to discredit the precarious regime of President Nguyen Van Thieu and the Vietnamization policy of President Richard M. Nixon and achieve a political settlement of the Indochina conflict, on the Communists’ terms.
WASHINGTON — In the basement of the White House there is an area full of reassuringly modern communications equipment that its known to its inhabitants as the Situation Room. In the middle of the complex there is a small conference room insulated from the surrounding commotion by paneled walls. It was to this room that Henry A. Kissinger summoned President Nixon's senior advisers last week, and their mood was as sober and serious as the news clattering over the teleprinters outside.
If Peter Brown had fought in World War II instead of ietnam, he would have come home to a cordial welcome from the Veterans Administration and to a’ G.I. Bill of Rights that would have paid all of his tuition and book costs, plus at least $75 a month to live on while he finished high school or attended college.
Reversing his policy of de‐escalation—as indeed he had warned he might do under these circumstances—President Nixon has recommitted the military forces of the United States to an expanding new battle in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 8—After hesitating to make a judgment for most of the week, Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker and Gen. Creighton W. Abrams have told the White House and the Pentagon that they believe the current enemy attacks are an all‐out military offensive that will continue for months and will not end until they either attain their objectives or are defeated.
SAIGON, April 8 (AP)—South Vietnam and Japan divided their two singles matches today in the three offive Eastern Zone Davis Cup tennis tournament.
Before the Vietnam war turned sour and Americans could still believe in legends, there was an idealized cold‐war warrior whose bravery, boldness and common sense were carrying the American Way to victory over Communism in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 9—The South Vietnamese Fifth Infantry Division was surrounded by enemy troops yesterday near Anloc, about 50 miles north of Saigon. The division was still cut off today as superior Communist forces pounded it with artillery fire and blocked an armored column trying to rescue it.
WASHINGTON, April 8—The other day when the election returns came in from Wisconsin and the ball players went on strike and the war flamed up again in Vietnam and meat prices jumped over the moon, we turned in despair to our old electronic truth detector, Uniquack, for guidance
DANANG, South Vietnam, April. 8—American pilots who have been bombing North Vietnam for the last three days told tonight of a concentrated drive against surface‐to‐air missiles. that have made flying in North and South Vietnam increasingly hazardous.
POUGHKEEPSIE, N.Y., April 9 (AP) — Nine persons were arrested today on trespassing charges in what they said was a protest over ‘International Business Machines’ “complicity with the war in Vietnam.”
ON ROUTE 13, South Vietnam, April 9—As Communist forces straddling Route 13 continued their drive south toward Saigon today, the South Vietnamese high command ordered part of a division based in the far south of the country into action here.
Washington; April 9 (Reuters) —The use of B‐52 bombers in attacks on North Vietnam signals President Nixon's determination to stop the Communist offensive through the demilitarized zone into the south, military observers said tonight. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 9—Evidence of the allout intensity of the North Vietnamese offensive continues to grow. Senior American analysts here have said that only one of North Vietnam's 14 divisions has not been committed to battle and that an enemy plan, to commit three divisions to the provinces north and west of Saigon, has been discovered.

DANANG, South Vietnam, April 9—Since the start of the North Vietnamese offensive, according to unofficial estimates, 12 Americans have been killed, five have been wounded and seven are missing in the northern region of South Vietnam.
SALT LAKE CITY, April 9A law enforcement student and skydiving enthusiast, who said that he had been a Green Beret and a helicopter pilot while in Vietnam, was arrested today and charged with ‘the $500,000 extortion‐parachute hijacking of a United Air Lines 727 jet on Friday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 10—Masses of North Vietnamese tanks and infantry renewed their offensive north and west of Quangtri city yesterday but were beaten back by Government marines, rangers and tanks during fierce daylong battle in which the enemy reportedly lost more than 20 tanks and hundreds of soldiers, according to United States sources and newsmen on the scene.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 9 (AP) — Toshiro Sakai scored a 6‐1, 6‐0, 6‐1 victory over South Vietnam's Duong Van Minh today, sending Japan into the final of the Eastern Zone A section of the Davis Cub elimination rounds.
WASHINGTON, April 9 (AP)—Three or four squadrons of F‐4 Phantom fighterbombers remained on alert in the United States today for possible dispatch to Southeast Asia, defense sources ‘said. A fighterbomber squadron usually numbers about 18 planes.
LONDON, April 9—President Nixon's response to the Communist offensive in Vietnam, his escalation of air and naval bombardment, has special and agonizing meaning for one group of people: the wives and families of American prisoners.
WASHINGTON, April 10 —The aircraft carrier Saratoga has been alerted for movement soon from Florida to waters off Vietnam, Pentagon sources said tonight. The carrier Midway, alerted.a few days ago, sailed today. from California, the sources said.
WASHINGTON, April 10 —In a clear allusion to the Soviet Union's military aid to North Vietnam's forces, President Nixon said today that the big powers had a special responsibility to discourage others from mounting attacks on neighbors.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 11—Allied military commanders said yesterday that the North Vietnamese appeared to have suffered a serious setback in their drive into Quangtri Province in the northern part of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, Tuesday, April 12 (UPI)—Hundreds of American infantrymen were airlifted to north today to holster United States defenses in the region, which bore the brunt of the Communist attack across the demilitarized zone.
ON ROUTE 13, South Vietnam, April 10—A gigantic relief column of South Vietnamese armor, howitzers and troops crept a few miles north on Route 13 today, probing toward powerful Communist units encircling the Government's Fifth Division at Anloc, 60 miles north of Saigon.
LONDON —‐Twelve‐year‐old Su‐al is a Vietnamese orphan with bobbed hair and an easy smile. Every Monday through Friday she joins her friends and takes a bus to a local secondary school 10 minutes away.
To the Editor: Our Government has tried to soothe us with word that the war is winding down, that we are getting out of Vietnam.
HONG KONG, April 10—China expressed indignation today at increased attacks by United States planes and warships on North Vietnam and reiterated her support for the North Vietnamese in their opposition to the American actions.
Thirty per cent of college students say they would rather live in some other country than the United States, according to a foundation‐sponsored survey of collegians, personal and political attitudes
SAIGON, Wednesday, April 12 (AP)—Delayed reports from the field said yesterday that South Vietnamese forces on the front north of Saigon were forced by enemy pressure to abandon the town of Boduc on Monday. 
HONG KONG, April 11— North Vietnam declared today that “every Vietnamese citizen has the right and duty to fight the American aggressor any where on Vietnamese terri tory.” 
DONGHA, South Vietnam, April 11—It was quiet today in this deserted town, aban doned by its inhabitants early last week at the height of an artillery attack by North Viet namese troops, and the South Vietnamese troops that occu pied it had little to do. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 12 — North Vietnamese ground troops and gunners staged a number of daylong attacks yesterday in the mountainous western ap proaches to Hue, but were re portedly thrown back after los ing 102 killed. 
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, April 11—The Nixon Administration provided a cautiously upbeat assessment of the fighting in Vietnam today, but Pentagon sources disclosed that two more squadrons of B‐52 bomb ers had been given orders to leave for Indochina shortly. 
WASHINGTON, April 11— Dr. Jerome T. Jaffe said today that American medical tech niques, including “quarantine.” now provide the means to “break the back” of what he called the heroin “epidemic” in this country, much, ho said, as the use of heroin by the mili tary in Vietnam was curbed. 
WASHINGTON, April 11 (AP)—In a change of long standing policy, the Pentagon said today that the United States command in Saigon would no longer make daily announcements of American air strikes over North Viet nam. 
PARIS, April 11—North Vietnam called today for re sumption of the suspended peace talks and demanded that the United States halt its bombings and other “acts of aggression.” 
Plans for antiwar teach‐ins and assemblies by New York high school students on April 19 and for marches and demo strations three days later here and in Los Angeles were an nounced yesterday. 
WASHINGTON, April 11—The mili tary crisis In Vietnam has at least clarified the policy of the Nixon Ad ministration. In the name of protecting the withdrawal of American troops and prisoners from the battlefields, the President is now directing a mas sive air offensive against the enemy in order to prevent the defeat of the South Vietnamese Army and the over throw of the Saigon Government. 
One striking feature of contem porary warfare is the remarkable courage and hardiness displayed by Communist armies. This is as notable in Vietnam as the strategic genius of General Giap or the organizational talent of his staff. 
Although the unemployment rate inched up again last month, the business recovery appears to be quickening. Retail sales rose to a record level of $36 billion; housing starts continued to climb and families increased their spending on home repairs and modernization. Confidence is growing among economists that the earlier forecasts of a gain of approximately $100 billion in Gross National Product in 1972 will prove correct. 
WASHINGTON, April 11 — Legislation defining the war powers of the president sur vived a test today when the Senate refused, by a vote of 60 to 26, to send the measure to the Judiciary Committee for further study. 
PHUBAI, April 12 (AP)— Lieut. Col. Frederick P. Mitch ell today assailed television newsmen and other journalists who were present when Ameri can infantrymen refused orders to go out on patrol. 
PARIS, April 12—France to day backed Vietnamese Com munist demands for the re sumption of the peace talks here. 
PHUBAI, South Vietnam, April 12 — About 50 United State infantrymen of a 142‐ man company refused to move for an hour and a half today when ordered to go out and patrol the rolling hills around Phubai, 42 miles south of the demilitarized zone.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 12—The United States Military Assistance Command served notice on United Press International today that it in tended to bar one of the agency's correspondents hero from covering the Vietnam War. 
WASHINGTON, April 12— The State Department today called in a senior French dip lomat to express its official displeasure over France's call for an immediate resumption of the Paris talks. 
Unlike the men who fought In World War II, the vet erans of Vietnam have served in a war over which the country has been sharply divided. The Vietnam war, moreover, called for sacrifices only of those who were in the armed forces, while their compatriots at home have remained largely unaffected. 
WASHINGTON, April 12— Administration spokesmen em phasized today that President Nixon hod not decided whether to remove more American troops from Vietnam after May 1. For the first time, they left open the possibility that he might temporarily suspend or delay the withdrawal pro gram.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 12—North Vietnam's two‐ week‐old offensive has serious ly weakened the defenses of the most populous area of South Vietnam—the Mekong Delta. 
FIRE BASE BIRMINGHAM, South Vietnam, April 12—The besieged artillery base known as Phuxuan, which constitutes the main outlying defense of Hue, was still held today by South Vietnamese troops, but supplies of food and ammuni tion were running critically low. 
HONG KONG, Thursday. April 13—Premier Chou En‐lai of China said last night the American attacks on North Vietnam constituted a “serious incident of expanding the war” and declared that the Chinese Government and people were “closely following the develop ment of this incident.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 13—Moving under cover of predawn dark ness, North Vietnamese troops and tanks reportedly began an assault today against the pro vincial capital of Anloc, 60 miles north of here, which Com munist forces have besieged since Saturday.
A leading member of the direct marketing fraternity called yesterday for a fund to reimburse consumers bilked by the unethical practioner.
WASHINGTON, April 12 — Student presidents from more than 59 colleges and univer sities will attend an emergency conference here this weekend on increased war activity in Vietnam, the National Student Association announced today. 
WASHINGTON, April 12—The Sec retary of Bombing is very busy. There is, first of all, “this baseball business,” as he calls it. 
W ASHINGTON, April 12 (AP) —While Washington contends that Moscow is a major con tributor to Hanoi's new offen sive because of its shipments of heavy arms, a reading of United States intelligence es timates indicates that Soviet weapons assistance to North Vietnam is actually far smaller now than earlier is the war. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, Friday, April 14 (Reuters) — South Vietnamese Rangers hacked by tanks, artil lery and air strikes clashed with an enemy force of unknown size near Kampong Trach in southern Cambodia yesterday and reported killing 127.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 13 (UPI) — Enemy forces kept up their week‐long bombard ment today of the town of Kompong Trach near the South Vietnamese border, injuring seven persons in an early morn ing mortar attack.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 13—Despite North Viet nam's offensive, which has brought a division of enemy troops within 25 miles of Sai gon, most of the capital's residents appear calm and seem indifferent to the fighting. There has been neither wide spread criticism nor an out pouring of popular support for the Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
BOSTON, April 13—Senator Edmund S. Muskie, Democrat of Maine, said today that any de lay in the scheduled withdrawal of American troops from Viet nam would be “the height of folly” and urged President Nix on to “cease immediately” the bombing of North Vietnam.
PARIS, April 13—William J. Porter, the United States dele gate to the Vietnam peace talks, said today that President Nixon had offered to resume the talks with a session today but that the only reply of the Commu nists had been “a mushrooming invasion” of South Vietnam by North Vietnamese troops.
MANILA, April 13 (UPI) — A special committee of the Philippine Senate today con firmed American Congressional charges that the Philippines re ceived secret payments from the United States Government to send troops to Vietnam in 1966.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, April 14—Enemy troops, attacking yesterday with more than 40 tanks, captured half of the provincial capital of Anloc, 60 miles north of Saigon. But South Vietnamese soldiers of the Fifth Division reportedly held the other half early this morning after more than 24 hours of heavy fighting.
SAIGON, April 13 (AP)—Pres ident Nguyen Van Thieu flew to Kontum today for talks with his Highland commanders in that provincial capital. He ar rived shortly after enemy gun ners shelled the area.
ATLANTA, April 13 — The nation's Roman Catholic hier archy today denounced the recommendations of the Presi dential Commission on Popula tion Growth and the American Future as “beset with incon sistencies” and in the case of those involving liberalized abortion policies, fundamen tally “immoral.”
President Nixon's massive recommitment of American power and prestige in Vietnam is ominously reminiscent of President Johnson's costly and futile intervention that began in 1965, a few months after the Tonkin inci dents. Because of the risks of a prolonged and still wider war and the danger that the growing concentra tion of sea and air forces in Southeast Asia may seriously dilute this country's capacity to deal with emergencies elsewhere, it is essential that Americans take a hard look at the premises upon which this latest escalation is based, as most did not do in 1965.
MOSCOW, April 13 (AP) — The North Vietnamese Ambas sador to Moscow, Vo Thue Dong, conferred separately with Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin and Defense Minister Andrei A. Grechko here on “questions of Soviet‐Vietnamese cooperation,” the Government news agency Tass reported today.
WASHINGTON, April 13 — The Navy has bolstered its op erations in Vietnam to the high est level since the peak of the war in 1968, in response to stepped up attacks by the North Vietnamese. The attacks began two weeks ago and three days later were officially char acterized here as a “massive assault.”
HONG KONG, April 13 (Reuters) — North Vietnam denied today that its forces had crossed the demilitarized zone and invaded South Viet nam. The North also denied the existence of a “tacit agreement” with Washington that led to the bombing halt of 1968.
WASHINGTON, April 13 — President Nixon's secret April I offer to resume negotiations with the North Vietnamese re portedly included a major con dition: that Hanoi suspend its new offensive against South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 13, (Reuters) — Enemy and South Vietnamese battle field deaths showed sharp increases in the week follow ing North Vietnam's invasion of the south, according to figures released here today.
ON ROUTE 13, South Viet nam, April 13—A South Viet namese officer, whose lunch had been interrupted by a Communist mortar and rocket barrage that left some of his trucks and supplies in flames, took a deep swallow from a tumbler of whisky and looked gloomily northward along the road.
HAMMOND, Ind., April 14 —Gov. George C. Wallace assailed two of his oppo nents in the Democratic Presidential race last night and today, questioning whether their changes of heart on the Vietnam war entitled them to serve in the White House.
There is no doubt that the authors of the Constitution intended that the President and both houses of Congress share the awesome power to commit this nation to war. James Madison and his colleagues would be astonished— and probably horrified—at the spectacle of two adminis trations waging a major war for more than seven years without ever obtaining a formal declaration of war from Congress.
WASHINGTON, April 14— Administration officials said today that President Nixon had ordered large B‐52 strikes throughout the 200‐mile long southern panhandle of North Vietnam and that the objectives were diplomatic and political as well as military.
WASHINGTON, April 14— Their address is 1600 Penn sylvania Avenue, but they do not live in the White House.
OTTAWA, April 14—Presi dent Nixon called today for a new approach to Canadian‐ American relations based on a frank recognition of the “sep arate identities” of the two allies and the “significant dif ferences” between them.
WASHINGTON, April 14— Representative Ogden R. Reid, the Westchester County Republican who switched to the Democrats last month, has won a seat on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, one of the better House committee assignments. After switching parties, Mr. Reid re‐signed the com mittee assign ments he had as a Republican. He had been the sec‐and ranking Republican on the Government Operations Committee and fourth‐ranking on the Education and Labor Committee.
Since the election of President Nixon, the demeaning of meaning has continued unabated, As It was in the beginning, the current official effort is to make everything—no matter how extraordinary—sound routine with the emphasis on giving the war a patina of normality, optimism and even dull ness. The effort to play things down in this current phase is generally reminiscent of the early Unwar period characterized by low‐key words. It is a distinct dialect, but close enough to the first to be called Unwar II.
Senator James L. Buckley voiced strong support last night for President Nixon's retalia tory measures against the North Vietnamese offensive and said he would support any allied move “to declare the demili tarized zone no longer a bar rier” to attacks on the enemy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, April 15—The bat tle for the provincial capital of Anloc, 60 miles north of Saigon, continued today as powerful enemy reinforcements of in fantry and at least 10 tanks moved in again on the town despite heavy American air strikes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 14—Intelligence sources made available today what they described as secret enemy di rectives showing that the Com munist offensive on the front north of Saigon was carefully planned last winter in Hanoi as a trap to draw the South Vietnamese Army away from populated areas near the capital and the Mekong Delta.
HUE, South Vietnam, April 13 — The intensified war swirling around Hue and the area north of it near the de militarized zone is a study in contrasts—placid green rice fields and bloody bat tles only 20 miles apart— but none are so striking as the difference between the way the Americans fought here and the way the South Vietnamese are fighting now.
LOWELL, Mass., April 15— The issues discussed in the Democratic Presidential pri mary in Massachusetts may range from the war in Vietnam to secrecy in Government, but most often they are all dis cussed in terms of how they affect the economy.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 15 (AP)—Enemy troops fought their way into the heart of the southern town of Kompong Trach and were attacking the combined South Vietnamese Cambodia force there from positions in concrete buildings close to the town's market place, reliable military sources reported tonight.
WASHINGTON, April 15 — More than 200 demonstrators were arrested today in Lafay ette Park across the street from the White House after a large contingent surged into the park to protest increased American bombing in North Vietnam.
PARIS, April 15—North Viet nam said today that it had ac cepted a proposal by President Nixon on April 2 to resume the Paris peace talks on April 13, but that the United States had canceled the offer four days later.
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
By their current major military action in South Viet nam, the North Vietnamese clearly hope to demonstrate that “Vietnamization” has left Saigon able neither to win nor to end the war, even with massive American air and sea support. The Communists thus expect to improve their position for the renewed private negotia tions both sides now have said they want. In those negotiations, Hanoi hopes to replace the Thieu regime by a coalition government with the Vietcong playing a dominant role.
WASHINGTON, April 15— Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, de plored the American air raids of Haiphong tonight as “a reck less re‐escalation of the war” and “a wanton response to the utter failure of the President's Vietnamization policy.”
To the Editor:
OTTAWA, April 15—President Nixon and Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau signed a joint agreement today to begin the large‐scale job of cleaning up the Great Lakes, the world's largest reservoir of fresh water.
WASHINGTON—At 10 A.M. each weekday since the start of the cur rent North Vietnamese offensive two weeks ago, the Administration's four principal spokesmen have gathered in the small, smartly appointed office of Ronald L. Ziegler, the White House press secretary. With the latest bat tlefield reports and policy guidelines before them, they have consulted each day on what could — or should — be said about the offensive and how the South Vietnamese are coping with it.
DANANG, South Vietnam, April 15—A senior American military officer said today that South Vietnamese troops had shifted to the offensive in Quangtri Province.
LAIKHE, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 16 (Reuters)— Enemy forces have hoisted the Vietcong flag on the northern fringes of Anloc, South Vietna mese officers at this command post reported today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 15 — With the Vietnam war in one of its most critical phases in a decade of fighting, the Saigon Government is again imposing tough restraints on news coverage, particularly that of foreign correspondents.
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
HONG KONG, Sunday, April 16 (AP)—The Hanoi radio re ported that waves of United States war planes bombed both Hanoi and Haiphong today.
DETROIT, April 15—Senators Hubert H. Humphrey of Min nesota and Edmund S. Muskie of Maine criticized the Ameri can bombing of the Haiphong area and cautioned tonight that the move could jeopardize American efforts to disengage from the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 15— The Nixon Administration pub lished this week what it called an “unprecedented” Federal response to the White House Conference on Youth held one year ago—a 400‐page “ency clopedia” of what it was do ing, or had not done, on the issues of greatest concern to America's youth.
WASHINGTON, April 15 — Official indications here tonight were that President Nixon has chosen to stage a deliberate confrontation with the Soviet Union to force it to limit re supply of the North Vietnamese Army or restrain that army in battle altogether.
WASHINGTON, April 15 — The Vietnam debate in Con gress, quiescent for several months, is expected to flare up again shortly in the Senate with the introduction of a new version of the Mansfield troop withdrawal amendment.
MONTCLAIR — At 324 Bloomfield Avenue in this suburban Essex County com munity, Lyndon B. Johnson is still President, 500,000 United States troops are still in Vietnam and the next anti war march on Washington will be held in about two weeks.
Even the best of C.O's, at times, tend to regard their troops as expendable. Maj. Gen. George Lemming is not the best of commanders, and there by hangs this massively con vincing novel of the war in Vietnam, just after the Tet of fensive. When the general stages an amphibious sortie for a visiting Secretary of the Navy, he withholds the troop carrying helicopters that might reveal the tactical insufficiency of the waterborne operation. The ensuing misfortune is all the more dismal because it is superfluous.
First gasoline and oil facili ties, then a power plant and then a crucial shipyard were the targets in and near Hai phong of air raids that the United States began June 29, 1966, the commencement of a massive attempt to inflict both military and psychological dam age on North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, April 16—The South Viet namese defenses in the provin cial capital of Anloc, 60 miles north of Saigon, appeared to be gravely endangered last night after North Vietnamese troops, with tanks and artillery, pound ed the town from all sides and hit hard at reinforcements try ing to move up Route 13.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, Sunday, April 16— Waves of United States Air Force and Navy fighter‐bomb ers and eight‐engined B‐52's last night bombed in the vicinity of the North Vietnamese port city of Haiphong, 60 miles east of Hanoi, for the first time since the end of March, 1968, the United States command an nounced this morning.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 17—The United States command announced today that American warplanes had attacked Hanoi and Haiphong yesterday and that two American planes had been shot down. Military authorities said the raids “on the outskirts of Hanoi” had heavily damaged North Vietnamese petroleum storage areas.
MOSCOW, April 16—The Soviet Union made a formal protest to the United States today in reaction to the bombing of the North Vietnamese port city of Haiphong and warned that the expansion of the air war could aggravate not only the situation in Indochina but “the international situation as a whole.”
WASHINGTON, April 16—The B‐52 bomber, newly selected as the principal instrument of the renewed bombing campaign against North Vietnam, was designed 20 years ago to carry nuclear bombs from the United States to potential targets in the Soviet Union and China.
HELSINKI, Finland, April 16 (UPI)—About five thousand people participated in a protest meeting and march in here today against the Vietnam war and United. States bombings of Hanoi and Haiphong.
WASHINGTON, April 16 —Administration officials declared today that the United States was prepared to bomb military targets almost anywhere in North Vietnam.
DACCA, Bangladesh, April 16 —A demonstration today against “U.S. action in Vietnam” was led by Finance Minister Tajuddin Ahmed, who addressed a rally of 4,000 people.
STOCKHOLM, April 16—More than 11,000 people demmonstrated in front of the United States Embassy yesterday, demanding a halt in American bombing and the removal of all American forces from Indochina.
WASHINGTON, April 16 —The merits of the air war over North Vietnam, and particularly the question whether to bomb targets in the HanoiHaiphong area, were fiercely debated within the Johnson Administration from the outset of the air strikes in the spring of 1965.
The American Communist party announced yesterday that Gus Hall, its Presidential candidate and general secretary, had gone to Hanoi just before the United States bombing there.
WASHINGTON, April 16—Leading Democratic Presidential candidates accelerated today their attacks on President Nixon's decision to bomb the Hanoi and Haiphong areas. One of them—Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine—said that he would introduce a Senate resolution tomorrow calling for an immediate halt to all American military activity against North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 17—South Vietnamese official spokesmen said yesterday that all North Vietnamese troops and tanks had been driven out of Anloc, the provincial capital 60 miles north of Saigon that has been under siege for more than week.
WASHINGTON, April 16—President Nixon has kept silent this weekend on his new bombing policy in Vietnam to avoid overt challenge to the Soviet Union, which he still hopes to visit next month, and to avoid further inflammation of public opinion at home.
Slogans can have a fateful significance.
LONDON, April 16—In my generation we grew up believing in America. We knew there was a fundamental decency and humanity in our country, whatever its wrongs, and openness: The wrongs could be changed by reason and persuasion.
LONDON—The two channels of the British Broadcasting Corporation have had their problems and pressures in covering what one news producer called “our Vietnam—Ulster”; but one problem the B.B.C. does not have is any equivalent of the White House Office of Telecommunications Policy. Nobody at 10 Downing Street has the strength or stands for the policy of keeping public broadcasting underfinanced, noncontroversial and under obligation to the Government in power.
HONG KONG, Monday, April 17—Premier Chou En‐lai last night condemned the American bombing raids on Hanoi and Haiphong, declaring that the United States had “embarked again on the old track of war escalation.”
SYRACUSE, April 17 — Scores of marchers took part in a candlelight parade this evening organized by the Syra cuse Peace Council to protest the bombing of Hanoi and Hai phong. A coffin with a broken rifle on top of it was placed before the Federal Building on Clinton Square.
The stock market gave a creditable showing yesterday as it retreated only a small distance in the face of black headlines that told of United States aircraft bombing targets in North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 17— Student leaders called today for a nationwide campus strike Friday to protest the war in Vietnam.
More than 500 young antiwar demonstrators marched through the Columbia University cam pus and surrounding streets last night, demanding that the uni versity be shut down in protest against United States policies in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 17 (AP)—American troop strength in South Viet nam dropped by 5,000 last week to 85,000 men, the United States command re ported today, but Marine Corps forces increased by 1,000 to 1,400 and the num ber of offshore naval person nel nearly doubled, to 34,000.
WASHINGTON, April 17 — Well‐placed Pentagon sources hinted today that Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird had been less than enthusiastic about bombing targets in the vicinity of Hanoi and Haiphong before President Nixon's deci sion to do so over the weekend.
WASHINGTON, April 17— Secretary of State William P. Rogers today forcefully de fended the weekend bombing of Haiphong and Hanoi and warned that the Nixon Administration would continue to take “whatever military action is necessary” to stop what he re peatedly called Hanoi's “mas sive invasion” of South Viet nam.
Purple with turquoise accents sashed snugly at the waist with a matching multicolor print? Aquamarine piped in black? Persimmon worn with accessories of one's own choice? Comfortable, casual pants? Hardly typicalprison garb.
WASHINGTON, April 17 (UPI)—The Democratic Nation al Committee accused President Nixon of coming close “to play ing politics with our prisoners of war.”
DANANG, South Vietnam, April 17 (Reuters)—Brig. Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. visited the northern part of South Viet nam today to assess the mili tary situation.
WASHINGTON, April 17 — The Pentagon disclosed tonight that a United States missile frigate was attacked yesterday in the Gulf of Tonkin, apparent ly by a North Vietnamese gun boat.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 18—The United States command announced today that two American war ships were damaged in separate actions off the coast of North Vietnam during the weekend and that there were casualties on both ships.
AMHERST, Mass., April 17— Nearly 300 students at Amherst College voted tonight at an all‐college meeting to strike Thursday and Friday in protest of the escalated bombing by the United States of North Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 17 (Agence France Presse) —Preparations were under way here today for the evacuation of the aged and the very young to thé countryside in the expectation of a new American air raid on the cap ital.
WALTHAM, Mass—The one ques tion I wasn't prepared for was, “Why?” It was 1942, in Washington, D. C. I was going to school there, a freshman at Georgetown University, and I was downtown at the Marine Corps recruit ing station, to enlist. “Why?” the ser geant wanted to know, and suddenly I was embarrassed.
FIRE BASE HUU TRACH, South Vietnam, April 17 —Fire Base Bastogne, which had been out of food, water and ammu nition for three days, was fi nally resupplied last night, allied officers here said today, by parachute and by a band of South Vietnamese soldiers who slipped past Communist troops besieging the outpost on the southwestern approach es to Hue.
STRATFORD, Conn., April 17 —Nnam Chomsky, an antiwar activist and linguistics professor at Massachussetts Institute of Technology, was among 60 per sons arrested today during a peaceful demonstration in front of United Aircraft's Sikorsky Division plant here.
DANANG, South Vietnam, April 17—The South Vietnam ese say that they have killed more than 6,000 North Viet namese and have destroyed about 100 enemy tanks since the beginning of the offensive more than two weeks ago. Most American officers in the field say that they doubt the figures and many advisers to the South Vietnamese refuse to confirm them.
It was gloom and doom on one side of Wall Street yester day, as black‐robed tax pro testers who consider Richard M. Nixon a Socialist held a “funeral for economic freedom” at the corner of Broad Street.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 18—American fighter‐bombers and 13–52's stayed clear of the Hanoi and Haiphong areas in their air strikes yesterday, authoritative officers reported.
Man in the News
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 17 (Agence France‐Press) —North Vietnam today bitterly condemned the bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong, describ ing the attacks as sabotage of the Paris peace talks.
WASHINGTON, April 17—Here, at last, is something every American has needed for years—a concise guide to the Vietnam war which will help him avoid thinking about the Vietnam war:
PARIS, April 17—North Viet nam offered a possibility of new secret peace talks today if the United States would halt its air attacks and resume the regu lar weekly sessions of the Paris conference.
Following are the texts of the Soviet protest note de livered Sunday to the United States Ambassador, Jacob D. Beam, and made public yes terday, and of the United States reply, also made pub lic yesterday:
WASHINGTON, April 17 — The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted today to back a cutoff of funds for all hos tilities in Indochina after this year provided Hanoi releases all American prisoners of war.
Following are excerpts from a transcript of the testimony by Secretary of State William P. Rogers at the Senate For eign Relations Committee hearings in Washington yes terday, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of A.B.C. News:
SAN FRANCISCO, April 17 (UPI)—Antiwar demonstrations erupted today on both sides of San Francisco Bay over renewed United States bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, April 17 (UPI)—Newspapers in saigon, quoting “well‐in formed sources,” said today that a 1,200‐man force of South Vietnamese marines had invaded North Vietnam.
MOSCOW, April 17—The So viet Union, stepping up public pressure on the Nixon Adminis tration to curb the air war over North Vietnam, published a protest note tonight accusing the United States of having damaged four Soviet merchant vessels during the raids on Hai phong.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 18—The be sieged town of Anloc, 60 miles north of here, reportedly re mains under South Vietnamese control, but the North Vietnam ese grip on the road leading to it from the south appears to be tightening.
Four American Commu nists, including Gus Hall, their party's candidate for President, came under three bombings by United States planes and witnessed a fourth in North Vietnam, according to a dispatch from Hanoi by Joseph North printed yester day in the Communist news paper, Daily World.
WASHINGTON, April 18— The Democratic Presidential candidates have sharpened their attacks on President Nixon's war policy since the weekend bombing of Hanoi and Hai phong, but their criticisms so far have drawn a distinctly muted response.
The rekindled antiwar pro tests on campuses throughout the country erupted into vio lence last night at Harvard, where students stormed the uni versity's Center for Interna tional Affairs.
LONDON, April 18 — The American bombing campaign in North Vietnam has so far stirred little public reaction in Western Europe, with only a few relatively small‐scale dem onstrations.
PARIS—The Vietnam campaign has now attained a “go for broke” aspect perhaps never before reached not even during the 1968 Communist Tet offen sive with its enormous losses quan titative on Hanoi's side but qualitative on our own, headed by President John son's.
PEKING, Wednesday, April 19 (Reuters) — Hugh Scott, the Senate Republican leader and Mike Mansfield, the Dem ocratic leader, arrived early today just hours after the party journal Jenmin Jih Pao began a new attack on the American bombing of North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 18—The Ad ministration is talking and acting tough against North Vietnam these days but the evidence behind the scenes here is that this is a temporary expression of Presidential frustration and anger rather than a calculated plan to force a showdown with the Soviet Union in Indochina.
PNOMPENH Cambodia, April 18 (AP) — North Vietnamese troops reportedly began heavy assaults on a Cambodian relief column. 145 miles from here to day as it sought to reach a 1,000‐man Government force trapped near the temples of Angkor in northwestern Cam bodia. A military spokesman termed the attacks “very fierce” and said there were in dications that the column might be surrounded.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 19—North Vietnamese troops reportedly pressed their attack on the besieged town of Anloc with at least two tanks yesterday. The Saigon command said that the tanks had pushed into the town, a provincial capital 60 miles north of here, but had been beaten back by the South Vietnamese defenders.
MOSCOW, April 18 —The questions came fast: What's the cheapest car in America? Are there many service stations? How do you sell a car? How do classified advertisements work? Can Negroes ride on buses? Why is your medical care so expensive? Isn't Angela Davis being persecuted because she is black and a Communist? What do you think of the war in Vietnam?
WASHINGTON, April 18— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that as long as the North Vietnamese con tinued their invasion of the South, any area of North Viet nam was subject to bombing attack by the United States.
President Nixon's decision to turn the clock back four years by escalating the bombing of North Vietnam from its southern panhandle to the Hanoi‐Haiphong area is an exercise in folly and futility. It revives a strategy tried for three years and abandoned finally by President Johnson in 1968 because it was demonstrably a failure. The mystery is why it is being tried again.
WASHINGTON, April. 18 — There has been much debate here in recent days about both the value and the wisdom of the resumption of air strikes against Hanoi and Haiphong. The news from the battlefield in Vietnam and from the cam puses and election trails in the United States suggests that thesense of crisis will continue for some time. But as Viet nam crises go, this one has a most distinctiveand complex configuration.
UTAPAO, Thailand, April 16 —At this huge B‐52 base sprawling against the Gulf of Siam there is a new and evi dent tension among the bomber crews, who for the first time are coming under close fire from North Vietnamese sur face‐to‐air missiles.
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 18 (Agence France‐Presse)—A North Vietnamese commission said today that American air raids over the weekend killed 13 civilians and wounded 27 in Hanoi and left 47 dead and 101 wounded in Haiphong.
HUE, South Vietnam, April 18—When Pvt. Tran Van Lam of the North Vietnamese Army got orders to march to South Vietnam two weeks ago, he told himself that he would nev er see his home again. None of his friends or relatives who had been sent south to the war had ever returned.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 19 — The guided‐missile frigate Worden was hit by missiles fired from United States aircraft, not by enemy fire from torpedo boats as suggested by the Pentagon on Monday, the United States command said today.
The head of the United Serv ice Organizations said here yes terday that “preliminary find ings” indicated that four or five former employes had been in volved in alleged financial ir regularities.
HONG KONG, April 18— Asian countries are reacting along predictable lines to the renewed American bombing at tacks on Hanoi and Haiphong.
WASHINGTON, April 19 —The Democratic leadership of the Senate thwarted an attempt by a group of Republican conservatives today to rush through a resolution condemning the North Vietnamese as aggressors and endorsing United States policies in Vietnam.
The bombs that thundered down on North Vietnam from American B‐52's have fractured two years of campus peace. The renewed student antiwar protests make it plain that many youths never relaxed in their distaste for the bloody misadventure in Indochina. But the lid stayed on so long as hope was retained that the Administration would fulfill its pledge to end American involvement.
Premier Chou En‐lai said in an interview televised yesterday that China would support Vietnam's Communists to the end in their fight against “the United States Government's war of aggression.”
NEW ORLEANS, April 19 (UPI) — Shouting, laughing, jeering hecklers caused Senator Robert Dole of Kansas, the Republican National chairman to abbreviate a speech at Tulane University tonight in which he defended renewed bombing of North Vietnam.
PHUCAM, South Vietnam, April 19—The people of this small, prosperous town on the outskirts of Hue don't like the war, they don't like the Communists and they don't much care for Government officials or Americans either. So they decided that each resident should buy his own gun, help patrol the streets and keep outsiders where they belong, out of Phucam.
WASHINGTON, April 19—The missile frigate Sterett is described by a Navy official as “one of the little workhorses” of the Seventh Fleet.
CLINTON, N. Y., April 19—The three forensic gladiators from Hamilton and Kirkland Colleges had been primed for two weeks with data on treaties, invasions and deportations so they would be ready to face three debaters from the Soviet Union who, they assumed, would be equally primed.
WASHINGTON, April 19—Of all the many questions raised here in recent days about the current United States role in the Vietnam war, perhaps a dozen best summarize the major concerns of members of Congress and other critics. Below are what appear to be the Government's composite replies, drawn not from any single official source but rather from the general testimony of Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and from the private comments of other top Administration officials.
BARCELONA, Spain, April 19 (UPI) — Youths protesting United States bombing of North Vietnam stoned and firebombed the Institute of North American Studies here, causing damage estimated at a few hundred dollars, an American consular spokesman said today.
WASHINGTON, April 19 —Scores of United States Government officials continued to labor today over big and not so big decisions connected with President Nixon's trip to the Soviet Union next month, including the places he will visit, the books he will read and the television coverage he will generate.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 20—North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops overran the town of Hoaian in South Vietnam's central coastal region yesterday, forcing the Government battalion defending it to withdraw and reportedly causing heavy casualties.
To the Editor:
Following is a statement issued jointly yesterday by the presidents of the eight Ivy League universities and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology concerning the war in Vietnam and campus demonstrations protesting the war. The school presidents are Dale R. Corson, Cornell; William J. McGill, Columbia; John G. Kemeny, Dartmouth; Derek C. Bok, Harvard; Robert F. Goheen, Princeton; Kingman Brewster Jr., Yale; Jerome Wiesner, M.I.T.; Martin Meyerson, Pennsylvania, and Donald F. Hornig, Brown.
WASHINGTON, April 19 —The outcry over the bombing raids on Hanoi and Haiphong has made it clear that the Nixon Administration's interpretation of the 1968 understanding between the United States and North Vietnam differs from that of Johnson Administration officials who negotiated the arrangement as the basis for halting the bombing of the North.
WASHINGTON, April 19—Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, read into the Congressional Record today the text of purported interviews with two former United Service Organizations employes giving details of alleged fraud and black market, activities by U.S.O. officials in South Vietnam.
PARIS, April 19—The United States delegation to the stalled Vietnam peace talks said today that North Vietnam's proposal to resume the conference offers nothing in exchange for its demands.
EASTON, Pa., April 19—The hilltop campus of Lafayette College was quiet and peaceful today, with Frisbees swooping and floating in the spring sunshine. Some students said they had scarcely noticed the new outbreak of antiwar protests at Harvard, Columbia and other colleges.
HONG KONG, April 19 —China has rejected a Soviet proposal for united action in support of the Vietnamese Communists, according to a Moscow radio broadcast beamed to China and monitored here.
BOSTON, April 19—Representative Paul N. McCloskey Jr. of California, the Republican party's most outspoken critic of the war in Vietnam, urged Massachusetts voters today to support Senator George McGovern, Democrat of South Dakota, in next Tuesday's primary to repudiate current war policy.
In an action aimed at heading off more campus disturbances, the presidents of the eight Ivy League universities and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology issued a joint statement yesterday deploring the recent heavy bombing of North Vietnam.
HARRISBURG, Pa., April 19 —The shape of Senator Edmund S. Muskie's campaign in Pennsylvania — the closest thing to a do‐or‐die state he has yet faced in his quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination—has changed radically in the last 10 days.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 20 —The United States command announced that American warships bombarding the coast of North Vietnam yesterday came under attack by MIG fighter planes and patrol boats in the Gulf of Tonkin.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, April 21—Another encounter between North Vietnamese and American naval vessels in the Gulf of Tonkin was reported yesterday by the United States command.
WASHINGTON, April 20—The Nixon Administration had no substantive comment today on the North Vietnamese statement giving Hanoi's version of the Paris negotiations that preceded the 1968 bombing haltand the understanding between the two sides.
PARIS—To understand the power relationships involved in the latest Vietnam crisis it is advisable to remember a little‐understood episode during the recent India‐Pakistan war. Last December, while the conflict was at its height, the U.S. nuclear carrier Enterprise sailed into the Bay of Bengal. The maneuver was explained by Washington as designed to help evacuate threatened American citizens; in fact it symbolized an entire policy.
PARIS, April 20—Following is the text of a statement issued in English here today by the North Vietnamese Government, giving their version of the 1968 negotiations with the United States that led to a halt in American bombing of the North.
WASHINGTON, April 20—Advance elements of the last North Vietnamese combat division remaining on northern soil were reported tonight to be entering the demilitarized zone toward the battle in South Vietnam.
SANTIAGO, Chile, April 20 — China brouhgt the Vietnam issue to it United Nations conference here today, condeminng what she called “criminal acts of war expansion” by the Nixon Administration.
WASHINGTON, April 20—The Vietnam war has illustrated once more the limitations of political leadership and the unpredictability of human conduct. Nothing is more tragic in this seemingly endless story of human weakness than the consistent misjudgments on both sides of the enemy on the other side. Time and again, by misconceiving the leaders and people they were fighting against, both have failed to serve their own best interests. It is happening again in Hanoi.
Since the Columbia University Senate was formed out of the campus turbulence of 1968, with the goal of providing students and faculty members a voice in the university administration, it has often served as a safety valve to student dissent.
WASHINGTON, April 20 —A coalition of antiwar leaders and groups, backed by more than 20 Senators and Congressmen, called today for a nationwide moratorium May 4 to protest the escalation of the war.
SAIGON, Friday, April 21 (Reuters)—The Hanoi radio reported today that five American warplanes were shot down over North Vietnam yesterday.
The stock market, shrugging off the intensified fighting in Vietnam, gave a good account of itself yesterday. Although a majority of Issues declined on the New York Stock Exchange, the Dow‐Jones industrial average overcame a loss of nearly 5 points at 11 A.M. to finish at 966.29 with a gain of 1.51.
WASHINGTON, April 20—House Democrats, denouncing both the Nixon Administration for its “dangerous escalation” of the war and North Vietnam for its invasion of South Vietnam, voted overwhelmingly today to support legislation that would set a termination date for the American military involvement.
Demonstrators swarmed into a closed meeting of the Columbia University Senate yesterday, forcing its suspension, after the university had summoned the police to take action against picketing students.
Gov. Marvin Mandel declared a state of emergency at the University of Maryland last night and sent National Guardsmen onto the College Park campus with orders to enforce an overnight curfew and bring an end to three days of antiwar disturbances and violence.
DANANG, South Vietnam, April 20 (UPI)—“Somebody hollered ‘MIG!’ and before we could swivel our gun around, the bombs went off and flames started corning through the hatches.”
WASHINGTON, April 20 —Senator Henry M. Jackson and Governor George C. Wallace, hard‐liners on Vietnam among the Democratic Presidential candidates, both declined today to defend the Nixon Administration's new bombing policy in Vietnam.
PARIS, April 20—North Vietnam and the Vietcong today formally proposed resuming the stalled peace conference next Thursday and indicated that they would agree to meet whether the United States halted its bombing attacks or not.
Only through sheer abdication of responsibility could the Democratic nominee this summer not assail the President's renewal of a Vietnam “victory” through air power. It would be equally strange if either the White House, Hanoi or Moscow chose its moves in this latest round unmindful of next November's election.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, April 21—North Vietnamese tanks attacked the besieged town of Anloc again yesterday after a heavy artillery barrage, but they were beaten back with the loss of six of the heavy Soviet‐made tanks, allied military commanders here said.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, April 20—Hoaian, a district capital, was yielded to North Vietnamese forces yesterday before they had even attacked it, a witness to the operation disclosed today, and the defending troops fled in disorder.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, April 22—United States B‐52 bombers and Air Force and Navy fighter‐bombers struck yesterday at targets in North Vietnam around Thanhhoa, about 80 miles south of Hanoi, the United States command an nounced.
WASHINGTON, April 21— An effort by some New York City Representatives to get the Federal Government to give a square block of Man hattan to the city for hous ing failed disastrously this week on the House floor.
ATLANTA, April 21 — The General Conference of the United Methodist Church adopt ed today what were described as landmark doctrinal guide lines, designed to help people understand their religion in, contemporary society.
The rhetoric was late nine teen sixties at Fordham Univer sity yesterday. So was the long hair and the studiously scruffy garb. But the old radical spirit. many students agreed, was gone.
GREENSBURG, Pa., April 21 —Senator Muskie said here to day that his criticism of the American bombing campaign over North Vietnam was based on President Nixon's assess ment that the South Vietnamese were capable of defending themselves in the war in South east Asia.
WASHINGTON — The beauty of spring in Washington is even more intense than remembered. The sudden heat, the blossoms, the parks set out with flowers, the acres of marble and granite gleaming in the sun: It all suggests, as it was intended to, the freshness and promise of a new country.
MOSCOW, April 21—Dele gations of the Soviet Union and the United States an nounced today that they had reached an understanding on improving maritime shipping links between the two coun tries.
WASHINGTON, April 21— Vice President Agnew today ac cused five Democratic Senators including three Presidential candidates, of “staking their credibility and some of them their political future” on the failure of Nixon Administration policies in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, April 22 — A 10,000‐ man South Vietnamese relief force has given up efforts to break through to the be leaguered garrison of Anloc and now has the mission of de fending its own flanks, military officers disclosed yesterday.
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 21 (Agence France‐Presse)— Several times in the last 24 hours the prealert signal has sounded here, warning the pop ulace to remain near air‐raid shelters.
Thanhhoa, in the target area struck yesterday by American bombers, is situated in the Ma River delta about seven miles from the coast of the Gulf of Tonkin and has a population of about 60,000.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, April 22—Five Sai gon newspapers and a weekly magazine were seized yester day, the Government an nounced today.
Spiro T. Agnew has again overreached himself in his eagerness to defame The Times, a favorite target of his ever since we stated in the 1968 campaign that he was unfit to be Vice President of the United States—an opinion we have never had reason to revise. In his ag gressive defense of President Nixon's Vietnam policy before the American Society of Newspaper Editors yes terday, the Vice President could not refrain from making the kind of slyly misleading statement about The Times that, behind his characteristic facade of frank and brutal honesty, totally distorts the truth.
BALTIMORE, April 21 (AP)— Judge James R. Miller today dis missed a suit in United States District Court here seeking to enjoin the use of Federal taxes to support the war in Vietnam. Judge Miller called the injunc tion, requested by seven Mary land residents, an improper in terference with executive and legislative responsibilities in foreign affairs.
Although most campuses were quiet, thousands of stu dents and other groups across the nation demonstrated yes terday against the Vietnam war, in some places violently.
Today has been proclaimed “Peace Action Day” by a number of antiwar groups, and demonstrations are ex pected here, in California and in Washington.
One of the difficulties with campus strikes and other dem onstrations is that they tend to focus attention on the be havior of the protesters insteadof the substance of the protest. Be low is a compila tion of the kind of questions that the Administrationand its supporters are posing to their critics, at least rhetori cally, and an effort to distill from Congressional debates and other discussion the responses of those critics.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 21 (AP) — An Allied commando team snatched two United States airmen from the middle of a North Vietnamese invasion force, but the opera tion cost the lives of seven other Americans, United States sources disclosed today.
WASHINGTON, April 21 (AP) — Secretary of the Army Robert F. Froehlke today ad monished or reprimanded a major general and two other veteran officers for “sub standard performance of duty” in connection with an enemyattack that killed 33 United States soldiers in Vietnam last year. One of the officers lost a promotion to brigadier general.
Representative Herman Ba dillo endorsed George McGov ern's candidacy for the Demo cratic Presidential nomination yesterday after taking the South Dakota Senator on a two‐hour tour through a rubble strewn section in the South Bronx.
ANKHE, South Vietnam, April 21—With the Ameri cans nearly all gone and the Communists confidently mov ing their forces ever closer, Vietnamization is turning Ankhe into a ghost town.
MANILA, April 21 (AP)—“It was a hell of a price of pay for one life. I'm very sorry,” said Colonel Hambleton, referring to the loss of seven other Ameri can lives in the rescue opera tion.
WASHINGTON, April 21 — The United States charged to day that Hanoi was trying to rewrite history in denying that there was an understanding that it would show military re straint in return for an end to American bombing of North Vietnam in 1968.
DANBURY, Conn., April 21— Seven inmates were perched atop a 175‐foot water tower today at the Federal Correc tional Institution here, to pro test the war in Vietnam.
PHILADELPHIA, April 21— Senator Humphrey said in an interview tonight that he had “spoken out vigorously” against the invasion and that Vice Pres ident Agnew was only trying to justify escalation of the war.
WASHINGTON, April 22—The antiwar student movement has readied another critical point in its turbulent history. Some of its leaders are advocating violence again and some are holding back, while the majority of the university students seems apathetic or frustrated, so this may be a good time to look at the problem.
HANOI, North Vietnam, April 22 (Agence France‐Presse)—Diplomats have begun to send their families out of North Vietnam because of the new wave of American attacks.
LOS ANGELES, April 22—“Well, we're back marching again,” sighed Morris Kight, “I don't know why we do it.”
CANTHO, South Vietnam, April 22—In the last two weeks, enemy forces in the Mekong Delta, using attacking forces up to the size of a battalion, have gained control of a large part of a vital province.
TRENTON — About 170,000 Jerscyans are now classified as veterans of the “Vietnam era,” and hundreds more young soldiers doff the uniform each month to fade away into a society with relatively high unemployment and drug‐addiction rates. Many rand in trouble, but state and local officials report that their intensified efforts of recent months are begining to reach and help more and more of them.
Hanoi's proposal to resume the semipublic Paris peace conference and to discuss resumption of private talks, despite continuing American bombing of North Vietnam, provides an opening that Washington is unwise to ignore. The United States can lose nothing, even if the semipublic talks remain mere propaganda exchanges, and it might gain a good deal. The possibility of progress toward negotiated settlement cannot be ruled out in advance. Moreover, Hanoi's offer involves a concession that should not be belittled.
HONG KONG, April 22 (AP) —The North Vietnamese were told today to prepare for continued United States air raids by evacuating women, children and the elderly to the country, building air‐raid shelters and impoving air‐alert facilities.
WASHINGTON, April 22—The Soviet Union is preparing to test‐fire a new intercontinental ballistic missile that is significantly larger than anyl now in operation, American’ analysts said today.
Iver Peterson's confusion with regard to the U.S. Navy and the air war in Southeast Asia was readily apparent in his article, “The Bomber Pilots Like Their Work” (March 19). Just as the purpose of the entire Navy shore establishment is to “follow the fleet,” the purpose of every man on a carrier is to “keep em flying.” Every deck hand knows this before volunteering for his hazardous and arduous duty. More importantly, it is the enlisted lifers (contrary to Mr. Peterson's belief that lifers are just officers) who are primarily responsible for keeping the planes in go condition. That the pilots and crews work closely together and enjoy a mutual respect escaped Mr. Peterson's limited view. That carrier duty for hands below decks is infinitely better for most of them than duty on a smaller ship also was outside Mr. Peterson's scope.
During the student protests against the United States bombing in Vietnam last week, R.O.T.C. buildings were the scenes of demonstrations on several campuses. But the student wrath was nowhere near the intensity of two years ago following the American incursion into Cambodia.
WASHINGTON — The day after he sent waves of B‐52 bombers against targets in the Hanoi‐Haiphong area last week, President Nixon bumped into an old Congressional friend as he was leaving a luncheon on Capitol Hill. Asked about the new bombing strikes, the President gently punched his friend on the shoulder for emphasis. “When they jump on you,” he said, “you have to let them have it.”
To the Editor: Last year President Nixon said that any Democratic Presidential candidate who relied on the Vietnam war as an issue in 1972 would find “the rug pulled from under him” because the American role was going to end before the election.
There was driving rain and bings cold but still many thousands of people marched and rallied peacefully for hours on the city's streets yesterday to rotest the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 23 — Afteri pounding the besieged pro vincial capital of Anloc with artillery for three hours this morning, North Vietnamese forces began a major infantry attack from four sides, in what appeared to be the beginning of the terminal battle for the town.
DANBURY, Conn. April 22 (UPI)—Seven Federal prison inmates here who scaled a 150‐foot water tower at the facility in an antiwar protest descended from their perch about midmorning today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 22—Diplomatic sources reported tonight that plans are being made for a visit here in mid‐May by Vice President Agnew, as a gesture of continued American support for the South Vietnamese war effort.
SAIGON—The planes took off after midnight last Sunday‐18 giant B‐52 bombers from Thailand, 100 jet fighterbombers from the Danang base in South Vietnam and the aircraft carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin—heading for Haiphong. Never before had the slow, unmaneuverable B‐52's gone so deep into the North Vietnamese heartland with its formidable array of Sovietbuilt ground‐to‐air missiles. But never before had the strategic situation in Vietnam taken quite the same form.
To THE EDITOR:
PARIS, April 22 (AP)—Representatives Patsy T. Mink of Hawaii and Bella S. Abzug of Manhattan met today with North Vietnamese officials and reported: “There was a very strong determination to see that there is a resumption of the peace talks.”
SAIGON, April 22 (AP)—The United States command reported today for the first time that air bases near the port of Haiphong, North Vietnam, were attacked last Sunday and said two MIG's were destroyed on the ground. They were caught at Kienan Air Base, four miles southwest of Haiphong.
You may have noticed at Jim's party last week, when you were saying that for the first time in your life you felt like a traitor because you wanted the North Vietnamese to win, I drifted away.
AUSTIN, Tex.—The debate over President Nixon's resumption of bombing in North Vietnam hinges on questions of fact and of larger judgment.
In a century in which war has followed upon war in almost continuous succession, it is difficult to remember that there are generations, in America at least, without a war they can call their own, Those, for example, who had their adolescence and early youth in the period immediately following World War II were often the children of fathers who had fought in World War I, the older brothers and sisters of those who went to Korea, and are now the parents of youngsters who have fought in Vietnam or in the streets of America in protest against the war in Vietnam. Those who came to maturity in the late forties and early fifties hardly think of themselves in terms of a coherent “generation.” Individually, they may feel guilty or lucky because they escaped the horror, but if they think of themselves as a group at all, they do not reach for labels like “tragic,” “heroic” or “lost.” They are a generation without a myth, without an event, without any picturesque image of themselves. They had no Hemingway or Mauldin because as group they did nothing that could be romanticized caricatured.
The benefits of storing boats in the backyards of homes is creating a new type of service in the boat‐transporting business on Long Island.
WESTFIELD, N. J., April 22 —Vice President Agnew kept up his attacks on the Democratic Presidential candidates at a New Jersey Republican fund‐raising dinner here tonight, charging that they had initially supported American military policy in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, Monday, April 24 (AP)— United States B‐52 bombers renewed their raids over North Vietnam on Monday and one was damaged by enemy fire, military sources reported. The United States command said the bomber landed safely at Danang Air Force Base, with no injuries to the crew, but the command would not disclose the plane's mission.
To the Editor: The news, from Thailand about our B‐52's bombing of North Vietnam has inspired the following telegram to President Nixon and several members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: “Only Communists and their sympathizers object to protecting our men. Obliterate Hanoi and Haiphong. Bombs away!”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 23 (AP) — Military sources said today that the South Vietnamese had suffered at least 10,000 military casualties, including about 3,000 men killed, since North Vietnam launched its offensive three and a half weeks ago.
The exiled Greek cabinet minister Andreas G. Papandreou said at a rally here yesterday that “our struggle for freedom will inevitably proceed to a confrontation with the junta, no matter what the cost.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 23—Eavesdropping by the enemy on radio messages of South Vietnamese and American forces in the field has made secrecy during combat operations almost impossible in recent weeks.
To the Editor: President Nixon has tried his best to gloas over the continuing carnage in Indochina while so‐called concerned Americans have been turning their backs on their moral responsibilities in increasing numbers.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 23 (UPI)—Enemy troops reoccupied the Kompong Trach marketplace today and reliable military sources reported fierce combat in progress at that border town, 75 miles southwest of Pnompenh and only nine miles from South Vietnam.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., April 23—Samuel L. Popkin is an assistant professor of government at Harvard whose special interest is Vietnam village life. He takes a relatively unemotional line on Vietnam by today's standards; he is critical of American policy but also speaks of excesses and mistakes on the other side. His careful views and his connection with Harvard's Center for International Affairs make him suspect in some radical quarters.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 23 (Reuters)—Gus Hall, the first secretary of the American Communist party, said ‐ in a broadcast from Hanoi that was heard here today that the bombing of North Vietnam was the last desperate act of insane men.
THURMONT, Md., April 23 (AP)—President Nixon continued to confer late today on the question of further United State troop withdrawals from Vietnam and on a wide range of other matters. He decided to remain at Camp David until tomorrow.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 23 — The North Vietnamese and Vietcong have set up a small district administration in the captured town of Locninh in Binhlong Province, just south of the Cambodian border, according to some refugees who escaped from there last week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 24—The North Vietnamese offensive, now in its fourth week, is showing no sign of diminishing in intensity.
MIDDLETOWN, N. J., April 23—Twenty‐one antiwar demonstrators were arrested today at the Earle Naval Ammunitions Depot after they tried to delay the loading of a munitions ship believed to be bound for Vietnam.
MOSCOW, April 23 — While world attention has been focused on the American‐Soviet confrontation over the Haiphong raids, the Kremlin has quietly been bolstering its position elsewhere in the world to, gain bargaining leverage foe President Nixon's scheduled visit next month. Well‐placed Russians say that Premier Fidel Castro of Cuba will be here in mid‐May, shortly before Mr. Nixon—a not so gentle reminder to Washington of its vulnerability in Latin America.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 24—More than 20 North Vietnamese heavy tanks attacked the forward command post of the South Vietnamese 22d Division at Tancanh in the Central Highlands northwest of Kontum this morning and drove the Government forces out, according to initial reports received by military sources here.
The Brooklyn distributor of a so‐called sexual stimulant known as “Ginseng Plus” was ordered in State Supreme Court yesterday to discontinue sale of the product and to refund thousands of dollars to dissatisfied buyers. Acting on a complaint by State Attorney General Louis J. Lefkowitz, who called the alleged mixture of the powder of “a secret passion plant” and Vitamin E a “hoax” and “absolutely worthless as a sexual stimulant, aphrodisiac or cure for impotence,” Justice Manual A. Gomez barred Mul‐Ching Importers, Inc., of 135 Highlawn Avenue, Brooklyn, from selling or advertising the produce and ordered the company to “make restitution” to any New York State buyer who has filed a complaint with state consumer fraud authorities.
SAIGON, April 24 (UPI)— A South Vietnamese Navy destroyer sank a North Vietnamese trawler today in the Gulf of Siam near Phuquoc Island and captured 16 of the 22 crewmen aboard, military spokesmen said Secondary explosions indicated the 100‐foot craft was carrying ammunition, they added.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 25 (AP)—Six United States advisers were reported killed in a helicopter crash yesterday during the South Vietnamese retreat from Tancanh and Dakto in the Central Highlands.
MIDDLETOWN, N. J., April 24—Seven crew members of the Navy munitions ship U.S.S. Nitro jumped overboard today as the vessel steered slowly out to sea past a canoe flotilla manned by 45 antiwar demonstrators.
DALLAS, April 24— The chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation warned today that limiting the freedom of American business to operate abroad would cost the economy jobs at home.
PEKING, April 24 (Reuters) —China tonight accused the United States of undertaking new military adventures in Indochina and pledged the Chinese people's support and assistance in the struggle against “United States imperialism.”
To the Editor: Representative Bella Abzug's article [Op‐Ed March 29] on the subject of representation in Congress, was quite logical (for a woman) but had some amusing connotations. She complains that women constitute 53 per cent of the electorate but only 2 per cent of the Congress, and that blacks, people with Spanish surnames and young people are also underrepresented. She expects that Congress might get disorderly at times, but, still, there should be more young people, women, blacks, Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, Indians and veterans of Vietnam than she sees among her fellow members of Congress.
A policeman was injured at Columbia yesterday and three students were arrested, but mostly the university operated in a rather quiet twilight zone —somewhere between being opened and being closed.
SANTIAGO, Chile, April 24 (AP)—Chile plans to establish diplomatic relations soon with North Korea and North Vietnam, Foreign Minister Clodomiro Almeyda announced today.
To the Editor: In his testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Secretary Laird said that he would “not rule out the possibility” that the United States might blockade the harbor of Haiphong or mine the channel leading to it. He gave no indication of awareness that such an action would drastically alter the character of U.S. intervention and lead to a direct confrontation between the United States and not only the Soviet Union and Communist China but a considerable number of other states.
To the Editor: North Vietnam, supplied by the Soviet Union, engages in a massive attack upon South Vietnam, across a clearly defined and internationally accepted boundary. A minority among us seekers of peace, much given to one‐sided vociferousness, sees nothing to protest. But when the United States assists the South Vietnamese to repulse this attack, the counteraction is shrilly condemned. This is as if a burglar, murderer or arsonist invaded a neighbor's house and anyone in the community going to the neighbor's defense is the party at fault and deserving to be roundly abused. To use Senator Fulbright's word, this is indeed “bewildering,” but not in the sense the Senator meant. Is this vociferous minority, then, really interested in peace? Or only in a fake world order of its own fantasizing?
WASHINGTON, April 24 With the help of some telephones and a widespread network of friends, a group of antiwar activists has become a novel source of information on military activity in Vietnam.
TOKYO, April 24—The movement of United States military forces from bases in Japan to the war in Vietnam has prompted charges by Opposition politicians that the United States is violating mutual security agreements with this country.
PARIS, April 24—In her letter to all members of Congress, Mrs. Binh has offered “democratic” and “free” elections for a future “neutral” government in Saigon,in connection with a timetable for the evacuation of all American” forces.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 25—South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands, splintered into small and disorganized groups after an enemy assault with tanks and artillery on their headquarters at Tancanh, were falling back toward the provincial capital of Kontum today with the North Vietnamese in pursuit.
WASHINGTON, April 24—President Nixon continued to deliberate today over whether he should order further troop cuts or suspend the withdrawal of United States ground troops from South Vietnam in light of the North Vietnamese offensive there.
WASHINGTON, April 24 (UPI)—Representative Les Aspin, citing two unidentified former employes of the United Service Organizations as his source, made public today information charging that “a gang of U.S.O. thieves” might have cheated American soldiers in Vietnam. He said that one of the agency's directors there had banked $2‐million.
WASHINGTON, April 25—Following are excerpts from National Security Study Memorandum 1, the 548‐page study of the Vietnam war ordered by Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, at the request of the President on Tan. 21, 1969. The document, which contains the views of various agencies, was made available The New York Times, which supplied the headings that appear.
PRINCETON, N. J., April 25 —The Gallup Poll has found that Americans are sharply divided on the bombing of North Vietnam and President Nixon's handling of the Vietnam situation.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, April 25—With two divisions of North Vietnamese troops advancing from the north and west, Saigon forces evacuated a chain of mountain bases today, and a South Vietnamese spokesman said the city of Kontum was, considered “menaced.”
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, April 25—An American adviser escaped frbm enemy‐occupied Tancanh this morning and was rescued by a helicopter that braved intense enemy fire to pick him up.
This afternoon at approximately 3:15 P.M. I left my office with Sheriff Brennan, accompanied by 17 of his deputy sheriffs to enforce the order of the court obtained by us to require cessation of militant blockades at the doors of university buildings.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 26 — The South Vietnamese Foreign Ministry announced this morning that it had agreed with the United States Government to reconvene the peace talks in Paris tomorrow.
NEW BRUNSWICK, N. J., Wednesday, April 26—Fire of undetermined origin severely damaged the Army R.O.T.C. Building on the Rutgers University campus late last night.
Senator George McGovern's strong showing in the Pennsylvania Democratic primary yesterday appeared to be strongly related to the recent intensification of the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, April 25—President Nixon will appear on television tomorrow night to discuss troop withdrawals from Vietnam and give his assessment of the war.
QUANGNGAI, South Vietnam, April 25—Near the green, overgrown ruins of Mylai 4 stand two new mounds of blackened ashes—all that remains of the two villages rebuilt last year by the survivors of the 1968 Mylai massacre. The villages were burned to the ground last week, along with 21 neighboring villages, reportedly by the Vietcong.
PHUOCHIEP, South Vietnam, April 25—North Vietnamese soldiers, about 300 strong, quietly made their way early today to this village 24 miles northwest of Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 26—Military officers reported yesterday that North Vietnamese forces attacking on several fronts in the Central Highlands had trapped 2,000 to 3,000 Government troops in a border outpost northwest of Kontum, pressed 5,000 others into retreating and appeared to be on their way to cutting South Vietnam in two.
ATLANTA, April 25 — The general conference of the United Methodist Church approved today a strongly worded resolution charging Americans with guilt in the Southeast Asian war and calling on the President to cease all bombing immediately.
WASHINGTON, April 25—The White House announced tonight that the United States and South Vietnam were pre pared to resume the Paris peace talks at the next regular session, on Thursday.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 25 (UPI) — North Vietnamese forces bombarded the provincial capital of Svayrieng in the Parrot's Beak region of Cambodia today in what United States observation pilots said was an apparent prelude to a ground attack.
The White House released very little substantive information yesterday when it announced that Dr. Henry Kissinger on a four‐day trip to Moscow had met with Soviet Communist party Secretary General Leonid Brezhnev and had discussed both the agenda for Presi dent Nixon's Moscow visit next month and problems arising from the current fighting in Vietnam.
City policemen and deputy sheriffs charged into a crowd of students on the Columbia University campus yesterday after being summoned to open buildings that had been shut by antiwar protesters.
PARIS, April 25 — Tens of Thousands of Parisians took part in an antiwar demonstration here tonight, chanting: “Vietnam for the Vietnamese!” “Nixon Assassin!” and “Free Indochina!”
WASHINGTON, April 25 —Ellsworth Bunker, United States Ambassador in Saigon, predicted in a White House study on Vietnam policy at the outset of the Nixon Administration that North Vietnam's military prospects were so bleak that Hanoi would “make significant concessions” at the Paris peace negotiations.
Crackling over a portable loudspeaker, the revolutionary voice of the moment cried out the battle orders. “What we're going to do now,” it announced, “is decide what people want to do.”
KONTUM, South Vietnam, April 26—With Saigon's military leadership in the Central Highlands seemingly close to paralysis as a result of recent defeats, South Vietnamese troops and their American advisers are preparing to make a do‐or‐die stand at this key city.
WASHINGTON, April 26—Following are statistics tracing decreases in United States military manpower in the Vietnam war:
Gus Hall, General Secretary of the United States Communist party, who was in North Vietnam during the recent bombings of Hanoi and Haiphong, charged last night that American bombers had hit schools, apartment buildings, playgrounds and marketplaces.
WASHINGTON, April 26 —President Nixon said tonight that he was continuing his troop withdrawal program despite the heavy enemy offensive in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 27—North Vietnamese troops were reported advancing on Quangtri city this morning from the west and southwest in what some military officers said might be a renewed attempt to take the provincial capital.
Dr. Andrew W. Cordier, the 71‐year‐old former president of Columbia University and now dean of the university's School of International Affairs, moved quietly among the people lined up in front of his school at 118th Street and Amsterdam Avenue yesterday describing the tactics that were to be used to keep the building open.
At the end of a day of spring and quiet and even classes under flowering dogwood trees, Dr. William J. McGill, the Columbia University president, said last night that he was going to allow demonstrating students to continue to hold five campus building without summoning the police.
PARIS, April 26—The four parties to the Vietnam peace conference agreed today to hold the first full session in more than a month tomorrow.
WASHINGTON, April 26 (AP) —A proposal that would have required President Nixon to give Congress detailed information on United States bombing and other Indochina war operations was rejected by the House today after a debate on the issue of releasing such information to the public.
Presideiit Nixon wrote the concluding passages last night of his evolving plan to bring “peace with honor” to Vietnam: the reduction of American ground forces means no reduction in the American objectives in the war; the combined force of South Vietnamese ground troops, American supplies and American air and naval power can hold out indefinitely against all conceivable enemy challenges; from here on, therefore, the United States and the President's policy can be defeated only by a failure of will in the Congress or among the American people.
To the Editor: The Russians and their North Vietnamese puppets have no desire for peace. Their aim is to force a degrading defeat on the United States. They are hopeful that, in this election year, our subversive minorities will bully the President into surrender. However, those who remember recent history and the enveloping progress of the totalitarian monsters will applaud President Nixon's resumption of bombing. America, awakened, will no longer plead for peace but demand it. Peace with victory, earned by war; if necessary, total war.
Good evening.
KENT, Ohio, April 26 (UPI)—Thirty campus policemen began tonight arresting 200 Kent State University students staging a sit‐in on the third floor of a building housing R.O.T.C. offices.
HOUSTON, April 26—Antiwar protesters picketed the annual meeting of the General Electric Company today, but the company's board chairman, Fred J. Borch, said that G.E. owes it to the nation to continue to develop new weapons.
A small minority of students at Columbia, Harvard, Stanford and a few other universities have arrogated to themselves coercive powers which the majority on these campuses clearly does not wish them to exercise.
PHILADELPHIA, April 26 (AP)—About 200 antiwar students barricaded themselves inside the University of Pennsylvania's main administrative building here tonight and vowed to remain there until the university abolished its R.P.T.C. program.
MINNEAPOLIS, April 26—Two antiwar proposals sumitted at the annual meeting of Honeywell, Inc., here today were decisively defeated by the management of the computer‐electronics manufacturing concern.
At about 2 o'clock yesterday morning a courier burst in to a strategy session of Columbia students who had seized Kent Hall seven hours earlier. He was carrying intelligence from a bicyclist who had been pedaling all night between 116th Street and 120th Streets to keep an eye on a large contingent of policemen.
LEXINGTON, Mass., April 26 (AP)—About 75 persons were arrested today after allegedly blocking the entrance drive to the executive offices of The Raytheon Company in an antiwar protest.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., April 26—Secretary General Waldheim said today that he had made overtures to mediate in the Vietnam war but had been turned down.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, April 26 (AP)—A United States adviser was pulled aboard a helicopter and flown out of a beleaguered Central Highlands base despite his demands to be left behind with South Vietnamese troops, field reports said today.
KONTUM, South Vietnam, April 26—There is a special poignancy about the probable impending destruction Kontum as war envelops the town.
GROTON, Conn., April 26 —Forty‐two antiwar protesters were arrested by the police just after midnight today after they refused to leave the main gate to the United States submarine base, which they had blocked for 12 hours.
WASHINGTON, April 26 —Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Communist party leader, personally initiated Henry A. Kissinger's secret weekend trip to Moscow, a well‐placed Administration source said today. Mr. Brezhnev and Mr. Kissinger discussed the Vietnam situation and other issues sure to arise during President Nixon's visit to the Soviet Union next month.
PARIS, April 27 — The Vietnam peace conference resumed today after a month's break. It was a fruitless session, but by the time it was over there was a firmer prospect than before of secret talks between the United States and North Vietnam.
SAIGON, Friday, April 29 (AP)—A Government fire base in hard‐pressed Binhdinh Province on the central coast was reportedly abandoned without a fight last night.
HONG KONG, April 27—Le Duc Tho, a high‐ranking North Vietnamese official, said during a one‐day stopover in Peking today‐ that he expected “still greater victories” from the Vietnamese Communist offensive “on the entire battlefield of Vietnam.”
Although its producer, David Gil, insists that "Journey Through Rosebud" is "the first totally honest and objective portrait of the contemporary American Indian on film," it takes a great deal of wishful interpretation to avoid seeing the movie as an invasion—rather than as an illumination—of a social problem.The film, directed by Tom Gries (who once made a very good, very somber Western called "Will Penny"), is as well-meaning and boob-brained as its hero, Danny (Kristoffer Tabori), a principled young draft-dodger whom we first see as he wanders lonely as a cloud across a hilltop singing "America the Beautiful." He doesn't actually wander. He struts (it seems as if he knows there's a camera near), and he throws up the movie's ironies like a bulldozer plowing through daffodils.Danny, who is looking for sanctuary, hitchhikes into Rosebud, the South Dakota Sioux reservation. He stays around to marvel at their rituals, including the kind of tribal dances that must always look picturesque to the outsider, and to sympathize with their frustrations as represented by Frank (Robert Forster), a young Sioux Vietnam veteran whose life has been pretty much reduced to beer drinking and small gestures of defiance towards the white sheriff and the Indian agent.After one arbitrary thing and another, Danny suddenly finds himself acting like a token offering, the feeble, unwitting victim of an assault that the movie seems to mean as a setting to rights of the massacre at Wounded Knee.Among the few unembarrassing things in the film is the performance by Mr. Forster ("Justine," "Medium Cool"), who is such an easy, unaffected actor that he doesn't look out of place among the large number of real Indians who are in the supporting cast, and whom the camera treats as if they were holy relics. Victoria Racimo, who is pretty and looks faintly Eurasian, plays Forster's former wife, an Indian militant who is required to say things like "I'm an Indian and I'm going to walk in beauty like the medicine men say."It is, I suppose, as much a comment on the dopily earnest tone of the film itself, as on the state of socially conscious filmmaking, that much of "Journey Through Rosebud" sounds like a parody of Black Consciousness movies and television plays usually made by humorless whites."Journey Through Rosebud," which opened yesterday at the Murray Hill, is described as the first motion picture to be made entirely on an Indian reservation. This information I will file with my list of other firsts, including the fact that Samuel Fuller's "Hell and High Water" was the first movie about a submarine ever photographed in Cinema-Scope. Contemporary Indians have been better treated by educational television in documentaries that may or may not have been filmed entirely on the reservation.
BOSTON, April 27 (UPI)—The police arrested 44 persons today after antiwar protestors disrupted broadcasting of WBZTV's evening news program in an effort to reply to President Nixon's address to the nation last night.
CARBONDALE, Ill., April 27 —Several dozen antiwar and prowar Vietnamese students studying in the United States shouted and screamed at one another here today in one of the more unusual confrontations to come out of the Indochina struggle.
HONG KONG, April 27—Bitter defeats and a strong wave of protest forced the United States to return to negotiations on the Vietnam war in Paris, Nhan Dan, the official publication of the North Vietnamese Communist party, said here today. It was the first comment to come from Hanoi on the resumption of the Paris peace talks.
On their own, some Columbia students started yesterday to reopen buildings being held by antiwar demonstrators, who were mostly other Columbia students.
MOSCOW, April 27—President Anwar el‐Sadat of Egypt came to Moscow today on his second visit in three months, to state his case for a Middle East settlement before the Soviet leaders hold their talks with President Nixon next month.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 27—Two correspondents of the United Press. International news agency were disaccredited today on charges of having reported troop movements before they were off cially released for publication:
WASHINGTON, April 27—The President has now defined his Vietnam policy more precisely than ever before. His policy is not only to get the American troops and prisoners out of there, but to defeat the Communist invasion, and “to prevent the imposition of a Communist regime on the people of South Vietnam against their will. …”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 27 (AP)—The South Vietnamese command reported today that Government troops last week suffered their highest casualties of any week in the war as they battled the Communist offensive.
A cautious attitude prevailed yesterday in the stock market following President Nixon's Wednesday night speech on the Vietnam situation—a big current worry on Wall Street.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 27—President Nixon's announcement that 20,000 more American troops would be withdrawn from Vietnam by July 1 was received in political circles here today with the same apathy that greeted yesterday's news that the South Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace talks would join the, United States in returning to the conference table.
The return of the United States to the Vietnam peace conference in Paris and the imminent arrival of North Vietnamese Politburo member Le Duc Tho, presumably for renewed high‐level private talks, are the first fruits of President Nixon's critical decisions in the wake the Kissinger‐Brezhnev talks in Moscow. These decisions —to resume negotiations and to continue withdrawing American ground troops from South Vietnam—outweigh in significance the unfortunate rhetoric with which Mr. Nixon surrounded them in his television address to the nation. For the moment, what the President does is far more important than what he says.
WASHINGTON, April 27—President Nixon's speech last night appears to have hardened the lines and raised the emotions in the Vietnam debate in Congress. For the first time, some prominent Republicans, such as Senators George D. Aiken of Vermont and Robert P. Griffin of Michigan, began to suggest that critics of the Administration were giving encouragement to the enemy — a point made obliquely by the President in his speech last night.
ITHACA, N. Y., April 27 —More than 100 Cornell, University students and their supporters continued to occupy a campus library here for the second day in protest of what their leaders said was the university's “complicity in the war.”
WASHINGTON, April 27—Senator Edward M. Kennedy called today for immediate steps to remedy what he termed the “low priority our Government attaches to international humanitarian concern.”
WASHINGTON, April 27—The United States accused North Vietnam today of acting in bad faith by renewing attacks in South Vietnam just as the American delegation was returning to the negotiating table in Paris.
HAILANG, South Vietnam, April, 27—Enemy antitank mines were visible on the road leading northwest toward Quangtri, but trucks, cars and motorcycles were using it today, dodging the ones that could be spotted.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, April 28—North Vietnamese forces backed by tanks, heavy artillery and rocket fire reportedly kept Quangtri under attack throughout the day yesterday and this morning.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 28—A high ‐ ranking American military commander here said today that the fighting performance of the South Vietnamese 22d Division in the Central Highlands had been “inadequate” and that the division's survival in the expected all‐out attack by the North Vietnamese against Kontum was problematical.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., April 28—If there are two words to describe the mood of the White House; they are hope and uncertainty.
NEW HAVEN, April 28—Seventeen Yale students ended a five‐day fast for peace late yesterday afternoon after a 24‐hour outdoor vigil in Yale's Beinecke Plaza.
WASHINGTON, April 28—A well‐placed Administration source said today that before the United States decided to return to the Vietnam peace conference, secret arrangements had been worked out with. Hanoi and Moscow for the resumption of private peace talks as well.
WASHINGTON, April 28 —Pentagon officials reported today that the Soviet Union in recent days had doubled the number of ships delivering arms, ammunition and gasoline to North Vietnam.
Danny Kaye Is the recipient of this year's Variety Clubs International humanitarian award, for his services to the United Nations Children's Fund and other efforts to ease the lot of underprivileged and handicapped children the world over.
MOSCOW, April 28 — The Soviet Union said today that it saw a victory for the Vietnamese Communists in Presidentt Nixon's decision to resume the Paris peace talks after a five‐week break.
The Pupin Physics Laboratory, one of the occupied buildings at Columbia, changed Thursday night and early yesterday from a battleground into a meeting ground as two groups opposed on the question of shutting it down found themselves locked in together.
To the Editor: Nathan Perlmutter calls World War II a “good” war (Op‐Ed April 18). There is no such thing.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, April 28—Long before it opened this Morning, Air Vietnam's ticket office in this shabby Highlands town was mobbed by hundreds of South Vietnamese in a state of near panic.
AUGUSTA, Me., April 28 —Antiwar demonstrators shouted obscenities at Vice President Agnew today as he left the Augusta State Armory. Mr. Agnew had been in the armory to open the biennial convention of the Maine Republican party.
CHEVY CHASE, Md.—The time has come to consider closing West Point. In my view it has played a primary role in creating an institutional system that has brought about the moral decay of the Army and the failure of Vietnam. If public apathy lets this system remain largely unchanged, then we must be prepared for more Mylais probably both at home and abroad.
On a balmy spring day, at rallies and by negotiations, Columbia students continued their efforts yesterday to get their campus back to normal.
To the Editor: It may be, as Secretaries Rogers and Laird keep saying, an entirely new war in Vietnam (in which case we should ask why it was so badly anticipated). But the Vietnam problem itself remains the same. There have always been only three possibilities. One is military victory. Our side can achieve it only through massacres and risks of international confrontation disproportionate to the importance of the stakes for America's national interest. The second is perpetual American involvement to preserve Saigon. This is bound to breed crisis after crisis indecisively. The third is a negotiated settlement, under our auspices or after our withdrawal. Due to our failure to win, this settlement inevitably would have to come close to Hanoi's demands.
SAIGON, April 28 (UPI)—The Hanoi radio said today that North Vietnamese planes and antiaircraft gunners shot down seven United States aircraft, including a rescue helicopter, over North Vietnam Thursday.
To the Editor: As the popular demand that we turn from losing our limbs in war to using them in peace becomes louder and as professional strategies for peace continue to sputter, our Vietnam policymakers seem at last to be soliciting the common man for suggestions. In appropriately simple terms, my view is that the Vietnam situation could most equitably and effectively be settled by a partition of South Vietnam into two nations.
ITHACA, April 28—A temporary restraining order was, served today on Cornell University students who have occupied a campus library since Wednesday. The order called for an end to the occupation and barred any further such gatherings anywhere on campus.
WASHINGTON, April 28 (Reuters) —President Nixon today signed a bill giving United States prisoners of war in Vietnam tax‐free status on their pay, the Internal Revenue Service announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, April 29—North Vietnamese forces driving on the provincial capital of Quangtri reportedly overran the town of Dongha, near the demilitarized zone, yesterday, and Fire Base Bastogne, a keystone in the defense of Hue, reportedly fell this morning under a heavy Communist onslaught.
PHILADELPHIA, April 28 (AP)—A sit‐in by 300 antiwar protesters at the University of Pennsylvania ended peacefully today when they obeyed court injunction ordering them to remove barricades around the main administration building.
James Wilson of Pennsylvania, one of the framers of the Constitution, wrote in 1790: “In order to enable and encourage a representative of the public to discharge his public trust with firmness and success, … he should enjoy the fullest liberty of speech [on the floor of Congress], and…he should be protected from the resentment of everyone, however powerful, to whom the exercise of that liberty may occasion offense.”
“So what if Columbia and Harvard and Yale are closed down forever? Who out there is going to care?”
My uncertainty about how to react to the commencement of the bombing of Haiphong and Hanoi is shared by a large number of my friends and fellow Yalies.
VANDALIA, Ohio, April 29—It is politically warm and comfortable for Hubert H. Humphrey in the house of the union men, the blacks, the Jews and the elderly, and so far he has shown few signs of heading out into the cold.
SAIGON—“What the South Viet namese need is a good beat‐'em‐up victory, but don't ask me where they're going to get it.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 30—North Vietnamese troops tightened their ring around Quangtri city yesterday, as many Government soldiers fled southward and intensive enemy artillery bombardment left large sections of the provincial capital in flames, reports from the scene said.
In regard to the violence which took place on the Columbia campus April 25, Dr. McGill stated: “I sought every reasonable means to bring these militant blockades to an end, but I was backed into a corner.
The movement for a national student strike on certain university campuses across the country last week at once a profoundly moving and a deeply disturbing phenomenon. The setting is all too familiar: an escalation of the war, national outrage and a sense of moral frustration and impotence which can find no relief.
MOSCOW, April 29— Le Duc Tho, a member of North Vietnam's ruling Politburo, arrived in Moscow today on his way to join the renewed peace talks in Paris.
Black, Puerto Rican and Asian students who occupied Lewlsohn Hall on the Columbia University campus and a contingent of blacks holding a brownstone off‐campus facility run by the university's Urban Center program said yesterday that their demands focused on issues not directly involved with the Vietnam war.
HUE, South Vietnam, April 29 — “Please understand, Quangtri is not cut off. We're just not going there today.”
ITHACA, N. Y., April 29—In defiance of a court order, 75 to 100 antiwar protesters at Cornell University today continued to occupy the library in Carpenter Hall that serves the engineering college.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 29 (UPI) — The South Vietnamese Information Ministry said today that it was dropping disaccreditation proceedings against two United States news correspondents who had been accused of violating military ground rules for the release of information about troop movements.
DALLAS, April 29 (UPI) —Eugene M. Locke, a trouble shooter in Vietnam for former President Lyndon B. Johnson and a 1968 Democratic candidate for Governor of Texas, died last night at St. Paul Hospital. He was 54 years old.
Despite Communist military successes, the intransigent rhetoric of President Nixon's speech last week and the sterility of the first resumed session of the Paris peace conference, it is still possible that a new pathway toward ending the war may be opening in Paris on the basis of secret arrangements reportedly reached with the Soviet Union and North Vietnam. There is some ground for hope that a serious effort at negotiations may at last be getting under way. It is noteworthy that Washington has refrained for the last two weeks from bombing the Hanoi‐Haiphong heartland, while North. Vietnam's secret negotiator, Politburo member Lee DucTho, is now en route to Paris.
The cynicism of the Nixon Administration has never been more in evidence than in the past few weeks. The soothsayers and strategists in the White House fully believed that the renewal of massive bombing over North Vietnam would not, this time, set off widespread campus protest. After all, they thought, in their own insensitive and manipulative way, these college kids wouldn't really care about the issues of the war once they personally were not threatened by the draft or once American deaths on the battlefield were “down” to five or ten a week. When will Mr. Nixon begin to understand the revulsion millions of young people in this country feel for this war—even if their own lives are not in immediate jeopardy?
HONG KONG, April 29 —President Nixon's television address on Vietnam last Wednesday came under attack in an article transmitted abroad from Peking today by Hsinhua, the Chinese press agency. The United States, the agency said, has “revealed its arrogrant features before the American people and all the people of the world.”
HUE, South Vietnam, April 29 (UPI)—Former Vice President Nugyen Cao Ky visited the northern front today, said the situation was “serious but not desperate” and predicted that the enemy offensive would continue for four more weeks.
QUINHON, South Vietnam, April 29—The South Vietnamese militiamen and regulars who gave up the town of Bongson today are scattered in the nearby hills, along with thousands of the townspeople who, like them, fled in terror and disorder.
SOUTHOLD, L.I., April 29 Miss Christine Kennedy, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Humphrey F. Kennedy, was married here this afternoon to Douglas Raymond Blair, son of Mrs. Abbie Blair of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Raymond J. Blair of Old Greenwich, Conn., assistant vice president for public relations and advertising of Overseas National Airways. The Rev. George Pfundstein performed the ceremony in St. Patric is Roman Catholic Church. The bridegroom, a Brown University graduate, served with the Army's First Infantry Division in Vietnam.
President Nixon says he wants a negotiated settlement of the war in Vietnam, but no one could prove it by the speech he made to the American people Wednesday night. He sent his ambassador back to the negotiating table in Paris, but his words make hard to see how he could accept anything that might conceivably come of that.
In reply to the letter from George Soll (April 21), inquiring why there has not been a “peep” of protest from the peace movement against the invasion by Hanoi across the D.M.Z.:
OAKLAND. Calif., April 29 (AP) — Robert and Dorothy DeBolt have added the 14th child to their household, adopting a Korean‐Amexicati girt whose legs are paralyzed by polio. The DeBolts, who live in Piedmont, have eight adopted children, including four. Vietnamese youngsters whom the war made paraplegics. The latest member of their family is Sunee, 4‐year‐old daughter of a Korean mother and an American soldier. After her parents were divorced, Sunee contracted polio.
Columbia University overrode the advice of Mayor Lindsay and Acting Police Commissioner William H. T. Smith in bringing city policemen onto campus during its current crisis with antiwar demonstrators.
WASHINGTON — Once again, an American President insisted that Vietnam was a crucial testing ground of his own and his nation's honor.
Spring has come to Harvard with fresh violence and protest. Officially one must condemn such turbulence but I cannot blame the young people of my country for being frustrated and negative. For eight years Americans have spoken clearly for peace and for eight years our leaders have waged war and destruction.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 30 (AP)—South Vietnam's general staff announced today that it would pay rewards in gold to North Vietnamese or Vietcong soldiers who defected to the Government and brought airplanes, warships, tanks or other vehicles with them.
The resurrection of the war protest movement on the campuses last week again revived the idea of “student power,” Closer scrutiny of this idea, especially from my vantage point at Columbia University, reveals that “student power” is a misnomer. In reality the strikes, “closed picketing” and in some instances the damage to property indicate student impotence.
Columbia University campus police armed with clubs and spearheaded by a small bulldozer broke through a furniture‐barricaded tunnel under Kent Hall yesterday afternoon and routed more than a score of antiwar demonstrators who had occupied the building since last Tuesday.
Gerald Jonas sketches a general history of the Quakers, then provides a more detailed picture of the Quakers in America, with special attention to their relations with the Indians, which, on the whole, were good. In later years, the Friends fell victim to factionalism but never stopped doing good in their own way. This is a sensitive appreciation of that good, especially the activities of the American Friends Service Committee, their sending medicine to the North Vietnamese and their work in the ghettoes. One need not be entirely taken by this small, unique group to understand that they have genuinely changed the world in a small, unique way. Mr. Jonas is also a conscientious guide through the intricacies of Quaker thought and feeling.
WASHINGTON, April 30, (Reuters) — Senator Robert J. Dole, chairman of the Republi can National Committee, said today that he believed Presi dent Nixon did the right thing in resuming the bombing of North Vietnam.
ITHACA, N. Y., April 30 (AP) —Antiwar protesters occupied the Cornell University engineer ing administration building for the fifth day today to dramatize their demands for an end to the Reserve Officers Training Corps and war‐related research at the campus.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 30 (UPI)—South Vietnamese and Cambodian troops gave up the village of Bavet and the border stronghold of Kompong Trach today, leaving the pro vincial capital at Svayrieng iso lated along a Communist‐con trolled 60‐mile stretch of high way.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, April 30 (AP) —Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that the bombing of targets around Hanoi and Haiphong had weak ened the North Vietnamese mil itary effort in South Vietnam.
PARIS, April 30—Le Duc Tho, a member of the North Vietnamese Politburo, returned from Hanoi today and said that he was here to negotiate with the United States for “a just and equitable peaceful solution to the Vietnamese problem.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 30 (UPI) — President Nguyen Van Thieu said to day in a May Day address to the nation that the out come of the enemy offensive would decide the country's “survival” and that Govern ment troops must fight on despite the costs.
HUE, South Vietnam, April 30—As South Vietnamese ma rines battled unsuccessfully to open the road to Quangtri, the northernmost town still in Gov ernment hands, an American general here painted a pessi mistic picture of the deteriorat ing northern front.
After receiving communion at the altar, 12 nuns—some wearing white sheets with the legend “One more person dead in Indochina”—lay down in the aisles of St. Patrick's Cathedral during the morning service yesterday.
Representatives of Columbia University and scores of dem onstrators barricaded in Hamil ton Hall met for 20 minutes last night, but accomplished no more than a formal exchange of demands.
Good evening.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Monday, May 1 (Reuters)— South Vietnamese forces in Quantri city below the demili tarized zone abandoned a big combat base on the northern outskirts early today, military soures said in Danang.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 30 — Allied intelligence sources said today that the enemy planned a major series of terrorist attacks and popu lar uprisings in May in South Vietnam's largest cities, espe cially Danang on the central coast.
PARIS, April 30—Follow ing are excerpts from a state ment read by Le Duc Tho, a member of the North Viet namese Politburo, today on his arrival in Paris. Mr. Tho spoke in Vietnamese and this English version was trans lated from an unofficial French translation.
COLUMBUS, Ohio, April 30 —The two major Democratic candidates in this Tuesday's Presidential primary here raced around Ohio today in a last weekend effort to woo the elec torate.
QUINHON, South Vietnam, April 30—American intelligence officers and advisers here be lieve that the enemy forces that have occupied northern Binhdinh Province have two Caucasians, possibly Americans, operating with them in either an advisory or a combatant role.
FLORESVILLE, Tex., Monday, May 1—President Nixon flew here yesterday to dine with his Secretary of the Treasury, John B. Connally, and after ward—to the delight and the applause of about 200 influen tial Texans—gave a recitation of his views on Vietnam, the oil depletion allowance, busing and other issues.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, May 1—Thousands of people were reported yesterday to be fleeing in panic from Kon tum, a key city in the Central Highlands encircled by North Vietnamese forces.
Asked for and got Vietnam assignment after working as U.P.I. White House photog rapher….Before that served as general assignment pho tographer for the wire serv ice on the West Coast…. At 25 years of age has seven years professional experi ence…. Quit Portland State College to take pictures for Portland Journal and later.
FLORESVILLE, Texas, May 1 (AP)—Following are ex cerpts from President Nixon's remarks during a question and‐answer session with a group of prominent Texas Democrats and Republicans last night at Secretary of the Treasury John B. Connally's ranch:
News Analysis
MOSCOW, May 1—President Nikolai V. Podgorny denounced United States policy in Vietnam today and pledged continued support for the Indochinese Communists.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 2—Landing Zone, English was struck by more than 400 round's of artillery and other indirect fire yester day, the Saigon command an nounced. It said the shelling had caused “moderate” casual ties, an admission of higher; than usual casualties.
HUE, South Vietnam, Tues day, May 2—The South Viet namese abandoned Quangtri, their northernmost province capital, yesterday, giving the advancing North Vietnamese their biggest prize so far in their month‐old invasion.
WASHINGTON, May 1 (AP)— First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr.'s lawyers have accused the Army of relying on command influence and making many legal errors in convicting him of the 1968 Mylai killings.
WASHINGTON, May 1—The publication of the Pentagon's secret history of the Vietnam War last June ignited a legal and journalistic controversy that is still under way 10 months after the first article appeared.
Prices fell quite sharply yes terday on the American Stock Exchange and the over‐the counter market. The decline was attributed by some to dis couraging news from Vietnam and concern over price roll backs here.
STOCKHOLM, May 1—About 60,000 people demonstrated to day against the American bombardment in Indochina in the largest demonstration seen in Stockholm since the early years of this century.
A 29‐year‐old correspond ent for The Wall Street Journal…. Born in New York City on Dec. 13, 1942, and grew up in Princeton…. Worked summers as a re porter for the Princeton Packet, a weekly…. Grad uated from Harvard with a degree in government in 1964 … Joined The Journal in fall of 1964 and spent first year in Pittsburgh…. Transferred in 1965 to Los Angeles to cover film industry and gam bling industry in Nevada…. Sent to Vietnam in July, 1967, and covered the war for 16 months…. Since November, 1968, has been The Journal's Asian corres pondent, based in Hong Kong.
ITHACA, N. Y., May 1—Faced with a court order and lack of campus support, some 100 stu dent antiwar demonstrators ended their six‐day occupation of Cornell University's Car penter Hall Library today just before 2 P.M. University law yers, unaware that the occupa tion had ended, were arguing successfully for a preliminary injunction against the building, take‐over in State Supreme Court as the protesters exited on campus.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 1 — Quangtri stood wrecked and empty today, an easy prey for the North Viet namese troops who had be sieged it and subjected it to heavy shelling and rocket at tacks since Friday.
The 1972 Pulitzer Prize for meritorious public service in journalism was awarded yester day to The New York Times for publication of the Pentagon Papers — documents showing how the United States became involved in the Vietnam war.
The Right Rev. Paul Moore Jr., a 52‐year‐old patrician with a reputation as a civil rights activist and as a vig orous opponent of the war in Vietnam, yesterday be came the 13th Episcopal Bishop of New York.
WASHINGTON, May 1 (AP) — In a suit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union, Acting Attorney General Rich, and G. Kleindienst and 13 other persons were accused today of conspiracy in the mass arrests of May Day last year in Wash ington.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 1 (AP)—United States troop withdrawals have exceed ed President Nixon's May 1 target by 2,700 men, the Amer ican command announced to day. United States naval strength off Vietnam continued to grow.
Hamilton Hall, which had been held by student antiwar protesters at Columbia Univer sity since last Tuesday, was cleared of demonstrators early yesterday by campus police men who entered the building through an underground pas sageway.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 1—Before the North Vietnamese began sweeping down from the demilitarized zone, Quangtri Province had a population of 306,000, some 35,000 of them in the capital, Quangtri city.
Tuesday, May 2—The United States command announced early this morning that rescue operations for the downed crew of a Navy P‐4 Phantom jet that was believed to have been shot down by a North Vietnamese MIG‐21 jet fighter last Tuesday had been called off.
On March 19, 1968, not long after the great Tet offensive in Vietnam, President Lyndon B. Johnson went be fore the National Foreign Policy Con ference to declare:
To the Editor:
QUINHON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 2—North Viet namese troops continued their advances in northern Binhdinh Province on the central coast yesterday, taking Tamquan Dis trict and tightening their seige of the Vietnamese 40th Regi ment's headquarters at Landing Zone English, six miles north of Bongson.
WESTOVER AIR FORCE BASE, Mass., May 1 (AP) — About 25 women were arrested today at the main gate to West over Air Force Base in Chico pee in the sixth day of antiwar protests at the base.
HONG KONG, May 1 (AP) —The official North Vietna mese radio declared today that the demilitarized zone between North and South Vietnam was not an international border and that movement of tanks, artil lery and troops across it did not constitute invasion.
WASHINGTON, May 1—The State Department said today that the Government was “deeply upset and indignant” that while the North Vietnam ese were pressing for a nego tiated settlement of the Vietnam war “their invasion of the. South has not only not slackened, but, if anything, has increased in intensity in recent days.”
QUINHON, South Vietnam, May 1—In Binhdinh Province, here on the coast of Central Vietnam, three county‐size dis tricts with a combined popula tion of 200,000 have fallen to Communist attacks in two weeks with little real resistance.
QUINHON, South Vietnam, May 2 (UPI)—The Binhdinh Province chief, Col. Nguyen Van Chuc, warned today he needed immediate reinforce ments or strategic Phumy Dis trict would fall within a week.
GENEVA, May 2—More than 350,000 refugees in the Viet namese war zones are being as sisted by the South Vietnamese Red Cross, the League of Red Cross Societies said today.
WHITE SULPHUR SPRINGS, W. Va., May 2 (UPI)—Repub lican Governors approved to day a resolution endorsing and urging Congressional support for President Nixon's foreign and domestic program, but made no mention of the Ad ministration's Vietnam bombing policy.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 2 (AP) —A United States Navy doctor, who was among the last Americans evacuated from Quangtri, said hundreds of South Vietnamese wound ed were left behind because “there was no way to get them out.”
WASHINGTON, May 2 (Reu ters)—Senate critics of the In dochina war, in a lenghty and unusual secret Senate session, were defeated tonight in an at tempt to place into the public record a recently disclosed Nixon administration study questioning the effectiveness of large‐scale bombing in Viet nam.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 2 —Thousands of panicking South Vietnamese soldiers— most of whom did not appear to have made much contact with the advancing North Viet namese—fled in confusion from Quangtri Province today, streaming south down Route 1 like a rabble out of control.
President Nixon is now approaching another critical decision in Vietnam: What to do if the enemy stops the in vasion before or after the battle for the former Vietnamese capital of Hue, and offers to make a deal while Hanoi is in control of a large part of the north of South Vietnam?
Neil Sheehan, the reporter for The New York Times who ob tained, investigated and sum marized the secret Pentagon Papers on the Vietnam war published by the paper, was among those who received Sidney Hillman Foundation awards yesterday for outstand ing achievement in mass Com munications during 1971.
WASHINGTON, May 2 — Administration officials tried publicly today to put a brave face on their reaction to news of the battle in South Vietnam, but throughout the Government there were widespread signs of growing pessimism.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 3—With the city of Quangtri lost, two South Vietnamese fire bases on the approaches to the former im perial capital of Hue were re ported under enemy attack yes terday.
ITHACA, N. Y.—The American peo ple are learning, many with surprise, that their President has been telling them the truth about his commitment of U.S. air power to the Indochina conflict. Mr. Nixon evidently means business with his bombers. However, the spectacular air strikes which occa sioned this surprise are only the tip of the iceberg. The other nine‐tenths of the monster are submerged—the ton‐a‐minute, workaday blasting of Indochina.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 2—The loss of South Vietnam's northernmost province and the collapse of two of its combat divisions in the last week have brought the Gov‐ernment of President Nguyen Van Thieu to a perilous stage.
DALLAS, May 2—Evidence is accumulating that the Viet nam war, though it has pro duced the lowest rate of psy chiatric casualties during com bat of any major war, is caus ing a remarkable number of delayed psychiatric problems that emerge only after the vet eran returns to civilian life.
The strong offensive by North Vietnamese troops that resulted in capture of Quangtri, undertaken almost simul taneously with the trip to Paris of Hanoi Politburo mem ber Le Duc Tho, could not have been coincidental. The military‐diplomatic character of the current Communist offensive has been evident from the start. That offensive, designed to improve the Communist bargaining position in Paris, is now challenging President Nixon's Vietnam policies as never before in this long and fruitless war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 3 (AP)—The United States Ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, conferred this morning with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam their second meet ing in 24 hours, informed, sources said.
PARIS, Mary 2 (AP)—North Vietnam said today that Com munist‐led forces killed, wound ed or captured nearly 10,000 allied troops in the five days of fighting that culminated in the capture of Quangtri.
VIENTIANE, Laos, May 2 (Agence France‐Presse) — With the upsurge of fighting in South Vietnam, a lull has fallen on the Laotian battlefronts, Amer ican military sources said to day, and Government forces have taken control of most of Route 13 linking Vientiane with the royal capital of Luang Prabng.
WASHINGTON—A substantial furor has been generated over the increase in American bombing in Indochina. But the bombing is simply the appro priate response to the blatant invasion of South Vietnam by the North Viet namese on March 30. This latest esca lation by the North Vietnamese is a major gamble in their strategy to dom inate Indochina, for they stand to lose much more than they could possibly gain.
MEDFORD, Mass., May 2 (AP) — The faculty of arts and sciences of Tufts University voted today, 49 to 32, to sus pend classes Thursday in sup port of the national mora torium against the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, May 3 — Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the cortunander of United States forces in South Vietnam, is re ported to have advised Wash ington that the most critical military situation was develop ing in the central region, where three enemy divisions are said to be trying to cut the country in two.
The three major broadcast networks have reportedly chartered a plane as an escape vehicle for their news crews in Hue, South Viet nam.
WASHINGTON, May 3 (UPI) —Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, re leased new charges today of wrongdoing by United Service Organizations personnel in South Vietnam, which he said might link the organization's executive director with a “ma jor multimillion dollar scandal involving the cheating of our G.I.'s in Vietnam.”
To the Editor:
REYKJAVIK, Iceland, May 3 —Iceland assured Secretary of State William P. Rogers today that her Government had no plans to press for a withdrawal of American Naval and Air Force personnel from Iceland.
WASHINGTON, May 3—Re ports that the United States and North Vietnam were ap proaching agreement on broad peace settlement circu lated throughout world capitals today but drew strenuous denials from the Nixon Admin istration.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 3—The fabric of Hue is dis integrating today, with at least 150,000 panic‐stricken people fleeing south on foot, by truck and in flotillas of leaking sampans as the North Vietnamese push ever closer.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, May 4 — President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered a shake‐up in the army command last night in the rake of the loss of South Vietnam's north ernmost province, Quangtri, to the North Vietnamese.
WEST POINT, N. Y. — Lucian K. Trugcott 3d said, on the Op‐Ed page Feb. 4: “A West Point classmate and a friend of mine, recently promoted to brigadier general, admitted to me that he found he had to be dishonest to ‘do well’ as a battalion commander in Vietnam.... He had to be cor rupt....”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 3 (Agence France‐Press) —President Nguyen Van Thieu warned today that ci vilian and military authori ties had the right to shoot troublemakers on the spot.
WASHINGTON, May 3—Lin ing Pennsylvania Avenue for three blocks in front of the White House, about 1,000 Quakers held a silent vigil, against the Vietnam war this afternoon.
Columbia University's cam pus remained quiet yesterday as classes were held in Hamil ton Hall for the first time in eight days. Antiwar protesters occupied the building until early last Monday, when it was cleared of demonstrators by campus police.
PARIS, May 3 — Qualified diplomats and international monetary specialists in Paris believe the Soviet Union is preparing to raise the possi bility of its participation in a new world monetary and trad ing system, when President Nixon visits Moscow later this month.
State Department denials of reports of an agreement for a cease‐fire in Vietnam tore apart a strong rally in the stock mar ket yesterday.
WASHINGTON, May 3 (UPI) Antiwar protesters, maintaining a 36‐hour vigil on the Capi tol steps, were demonstrated against tonight by young sup porters of President Nixon's Vietnam policies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 3— The Saigon Govern ment's replacement of its sen ior commander in the northern military region and the initia tion of court‐martial proceed ings against a key division commander are the first offi cial admissions of a general failure of leadership that iswidely seen as the root of the South Vietnamese de feats in battles. Though the Gov ernment has takenwhat can only be regarded as late and probably insufficient measures to try to start anew on the northern front, the same problems of leadership have led to disasters of almost equal magnitude in the Central High lands, where another division has also been all but destroyed by casualties and desertions in the last two weeks.
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 3—The newly replaced commander of the northern military region of South Viet name said tonight that his troops had disobeyed his orders to stand and protect Quangtri and that some “high‐ranking” officers would be brought be fore a tribunal.
The bond markets backed and filled yesterday as traders responded to poor underwriting results for Tuesday's principal financings and to rumors, sub sequently denied, of progress toward a truce in Vietnam.
Stock prices held steady yes terday, despite investor con cern over the military situa tion in South Vietnam, where the Communist forces have made spectacular gains this week.
So that he'll be well‐rested for the occasion, the Duke of Windsoi has dropped all social engagements prior to the time his niece, Queen Elizabeth II, calls on him at his Paris, home during her state visit to France begin ning May 16.
PARIS, May 4—Following are the texts of a statement at the Vietnam peace talks today by William J. Porter of the United States and of his comment to the press after the session, and of a similar comment by Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh of the Com munist side, as well as ex cerpts from Mrs. Binh's state ment during the meeting. Mrs. Binh's statement was sup plied in English by the Viet cong delegation; her comment to the press was translated from the French by The New York Times.
LONDON, May 4 — Secre tary of State William P. Rogers vowed today that the United States would not allow North Vietnam to conquer South Viet nam.
The indefinite suspension of the renewed public peace talks in Paris by the United States and South Vietnam deals an ominous blow to what may be the last chance for quickly ending the bloodshed in Indochina and for extricating American fighting men and prisoners in safety and honor.
WASHINGTON, May 4 — Harold Gibbons, vice president of the International Brother hood of Teamsters, said today that North Vietnamese leaders had told him during a recent visit to Hanoi that releases of American prisoners had been stopped because three service men who had been released were used for propaganda.
The antiwar demonstrations called for across the nation yes terday as a memorial to the “Kent State Four” were few, and those few were poorly at tended.
WASHINGTON — When the heavy fighting resumed in South Vietnam several weeks ago, the Administration began harping on the allegation that the North Vietnamese had violated the understanding they had entered into with the United States in Oetober 1968. The clear Implication has been that the United States has kept its word while Hanoi has not. The facts are that it was President Nixon who first repudiated and breached the un derstanding.
WASHINGTON, May 4—The Nixon Administration ordered more than 50 additional fighter bombers to the Vietnam theater today and decided that, for the first time in the war, six air craft carriers would operate off Vietnam. This will increase the American air strength in Indo china to nearly 1,000 combat aircraft.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, May 4—The Pay Board suddenly canceled today a scheduled announce ment of its decision on the wage contracts of East and Gulf Coast longshoremen.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 4—Associates of Gen. Duong Van Minh, President Nguyen Van Thieu's most respected political rival, said today that in the present crisis of leader ship, General Minh stood “more ready than ever” to accept the reins of this country.
WASHINGTON, May 4 — Senate doves, thrown on the defensive by the military crisis in Vietnam, began retreating today from another attempt to push through an end‐the‐war amendment.
PARIS, May 4—The United States and South Vietnam de clared an indefinite halt in the Paris peace conference today.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, May 4—Following is the text of a broadcast in Vietnamese by the Vietcong's clandestine radio of the order issued today by the Quangtri city revolutionary committee. It was monitored and trans lated here by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service of the Central intelligence Agency. The newly established Quangtri Provincial Capital Provisional People's Revolu tionary Committee has just issued the following com muniqué:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 4 (AP)—The South Viet namese and United States com mands reported today a de crease in their casualty tolls during the fourth week of the North Vietnamese offensive. Saigon headquarters said that the number of enemy soldiers killed last week increased.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, May 5—American military commanders and senior civilian officials here are preparing plans for drastically intensified bombing of North Vietnam if enemy forces continue their push on the city of Hue, ac cording to authoritative in formants.
Senator Barry M. Goldwater declared here yesterday that on the basis of what he said were Japanese intelligence reports to the United States Government, he foresaw a turning point in the war in Vietnam within a week or 10 days.
WASHINGTON, May 4— United States officials made a point of suggesting today that they felt they had been misled about Hanoi's purported readiness to engage in “seri ous” peace talks.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 4 —South Vietnam's President, Nguyen Van Thieu, made a hurried trip to the shattered northern front today, as his Government seemed to be mak ing hectic efforts to keep the situation from crumbling fur ther.
WASHINGTON, May 4—The Vietcong announced the estab lishment of a “provisional rev olutionary administration” in Quangtri city today, three days after the capture of that South Vietnamese provincial capital by North Vietnamese forces.
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 4—Thousands of refugees continued to pour into this bedraggled port city today as fears of an all‐out attack on the former imperial capital of Hue mounted.
TOKYO, May 5 (AP) —North Vietnam charged today that United States planes bombed populated areas Wednesday in the three southernmost prov inces of North Vietnam, killing many civilians, including 10 children. It charged that war ships shelled a number of coast al villages the same day.
To the Editor:
LONDON, May 5—One of the night mare aspects of Vietnam for Ameri cans these days is the sense of déja vu. We have been through it all be fore: the domino talk, the Presidential heroism, the reliance on American air power to replace a South Vietnamese will to fight.
Steve stiffened, looked around fear fully, and thought, “These people all look alike. How do I know who's friend and who's enemy?” Then he shook himself, remembering: “They are all your friends. This is Times Square, U.S.A.” Eighteen months after a nonpsychiatric discharge following four years Marine combat duty in “the Nam,” Steve still suffers unpre dictable episodes of terror and dis orientation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, May 6—Communist sap pers overran a South Vietnam ese paratroop base only six miles north of Pleiku this morn ing, killing about 80 paratroop ers and an American adviser and destroying six howitzers, according to military reports reaching Saigon.
BRUSSELS, May 5—Secre tary of State William P. Rogers told the Atlantic alliance today that the United States believes the Soviet Union “bears a re sponsibility” for North Viet nam's invasion of South Viet nam and that President Nixon will raise this matter with Soviet leaders during his forth coming Moscow visit.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 5 (UPI)—At least two United States UH‐1 helicop ters equipped with wire guided antitank missiles are reported to have arrived in South Vietnam for possible use against the enemy.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 5 — Despite the collapse of morale in the South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands in the last two weeks, the Communist offensive has halted for the moment, almost entirely because of the B‐52's.
WASHINGTON, May 5— Seventeen House Republicans who have tended to support the Administration's Vietnam poli cies urged President Nixon to day to propose a cease‐fire in Indochina and to seek a politi cal settlement of the conflict in the United Nations.
Senator George McGovern, once regarded as simply an anti‐Vietnam candidate, has been broadening his cam paign appeal by setting forth his views on a number of other major issues, including proposed drastic changes in the American economic system.
PARIS, May 5 — A North Vietnamese official told visi tors from California today that his side was ready to meet with Henry A. Kissinger again, “privately or publicly.”
The events of May 8, 1970, shattered whatever sense of community was then left in New York City. A group of construction workers attacked peace demonstrators in the Wall Street area. Thera ensued a bloody confrontation while in the office towers surrounding the scene many people openly cheered the contestants. (A few wept.) Some say the police, despite inadequate numbers, tried to halt the battle. Others say the police stood and let heads be smashed.
WASHINGTON, May 5—The White House confirmed tonight that Henry A. Kissinger met secretly in Paris Tuesday with Le Due Tho, a member of North Vietnam's Politburo, just two days before the United States suspended the Paris peace talks.
OMAHA, May 5—Senator Hubert H. Humphrey of Min nesota said today “We should not; be sending ground troops back in” to Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 5—The Defense Department held out a possibility today that United States Marines might be landed in South Vietnam to protect withdrawing American forces.
MOSCOW, May 5—The Soviet Government newspaper, Izves tia, noting skirmishes around the central Vietnamese city of Hue, forecast this afternoon that “a crushing defeat is near” for the South Vietnamese armed forces.
PARIS, May 6 (AP) — The South Vietnamese said that three United States planes were shot down today over North Vietnam.
CHICAGO, May 6—The presi dents of more than 60 private colleges and universities in the Midwest, including the Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh of Notre Dame, signed a joint statement yesterday calling for the im mediate withdrawal of all American military, forces from Indochina.
LONDON—The more the Vietnamese front disintegrates the more President Nixon's Asian policy is threatened and the more Soviet prestige mounts all the way from Suez to Singapore. Con sequently, the desperate effort to blunt General Giap's brilliant offensive has global implications.
Efforts by a minuscule minority of students to shut down the universities in protest against President Nixon's Indochina policies have fizzled. Temporary occupation of buildings and coercive picket lines at a number of campuses, including Columbia, Harvard and Cornell, con stituted contempt for the law and for the rights of other members of the academic community. These actions also amounted to self‐defeating sabotage of an effective pro test against the Administration's Vietnam war policies.
SAIGON — “Where are their of ficers?” an American military adviser asked last week as he watched South Vietnamese troops flee from the bat tered city of Quangtri. “There's no one to tell them ‘Stop’ and to pull them together.”
WASHINGTON, May 6 (AP) —Henry A. Kissinger's confer ence with Japanese leaders is now scheduled for May 11–14, according to informed sources. President Nixon's adviser on national security had planned to visit Tokyo last month, but the trip was delayed because of the enemy offensive in South Vietnam and Mr. Kissinger's secret trip to Moscow.
ATLANTA, May 6—In this Southern city known for its hospitality the League of Women Voters was none too kind to men last week at the conclusion of its 30th annual convention.
The presence among the Harrisburg conspiracy‐trial defendants of Sister Eliza beth McAlister, a religious of the Sacred Heart of Mary, should have erased the stere otype of the Catholic nun as the last of the unliberated species of American wom anhood, a person quietly moving about in unmodern izable garb, speaking only when spoken to, and de tached from the activist life.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 6—South Vietnamese journal ists back from the embattled northern regions of the coun try report that soldiers and ci vilians are speaking with re sentment of the United States, placing the blame for Saigon's military reverses on a failure of American support and sus pecting collusion between Ha noi and Washington.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, May 7—The South Vietnamese Government an nounced last night that it had decided to evacuate all civilians from Kontum city, in the Cen tral Highlands, south to Pleiku by road.
FIRE BASE 42, South Viet nam May 6—This strongly fortified and defended base, only three miles north of Pleiku and part of that city's inner defense system, was a burning, exploding wasteland of debris, wrecked cannon and bunkers and mutilated bodies this morning.
TAMPA, Fla., May 6 (UPI)— A youth hijacked a jetliner to Cuba today, threatening death to President Nixon and declar ing that “the skies of America will not be safe again until the United States Government ceases its aggression” in Indo china.
PRINCETON, N.J., May 6— The dean of students of Prince ton University, Neil L. Ruden stine, summarized this week the school's reasons for pressing disciplinary charges against 88 of the students who occupied the main administration build ing nearly three weeks ago.
A group of 22 labor leaders from 13 unions have agreed to call a “broadly based” national conference to set up an organ ization, Labor for Peace, aimed at bringing the Vietnam war to; an immediate end.
GODAU, South Vietnam, May 6—As darkness fell, the North Vietnamese soldiers emerged from their bunkers, confident that American war planes could no longer spot them, Lam Cuoi said, and lec tured him and his companions about Communist politics.
TOKYO, May 6 (UPI)—North Vietnam said that United States warplanes raided Namdinh city, 50 miles south of Hanoi today, killing and wounding “many civilians.”
WASHINGTON, May 6—The biggest problem facing us today is not Com munism but garbage disposal. The Government has been too slow to grasp this reality. Governments, maybe because they are so often dominated by military men, are almost always slow to leave the comfortable unreality of the past for the uncertainty, of the present.
WASHINGTON, May 6—During this latest crisis in Vietnam, there has been a mood of morbid anxiety in Wash ington, a combination of waiting for the bombs to fall on Haiphong plus a feeling that this is very risky busi ness which will not halt the enemy's offensive.
WASHINGTON, May 6 (AP) —The Labor Department has announced a $2‐million con tract with the United Auto Workers to, train 2,200 persons in 15 states for Jobs in auto, aerospace, agricultural imple ment and related industries. Secretary of Labor 3. D. Hodg son said Wednesday that the contract specified that at least 40 per cent of the trainees would be Vietnam era veterans. Another 600 will be selected from among severely disad vantaged persons.
HONG KONG, May 7 (Reuters)—A brigade of Cu ban volunteers has arrived in Hanoi to assist the North Vietnamese war effort, the North Vietnam press agency reported today.
TAKHLT AIR BASE, Thai land, May 6 (UPI)—American airmen worked late tonight, ap parently to reopen this base for an estimated 80 more Phan tom fighter‐bombers to be used in the Indochina war.
MIAMI, May 6 (AP)—The hijacker of the Western Air lines plane told passengers that he would return to the United States and hijack more planes to protest the Indochina war.
One of the oldest military axioms states that there are three ways of doing things: the right way, the wrong way—and the Army way. Mr. Pelfrey's excellent novel is devoted to spelling out the third way, as it applies to a tour in Vietnam.
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 6 — The Mayor of Danang said today that his city had become critically overcrowded with refugees and appealed to officials in Saigon to move some of them farther south.
“Now it's suddenly dawning on higher authority here that the South Vietnamese system is inadequate and has been all along.” This assessment by an American adviser in the wake of the recent North Vietnamese victories gets close to, but not quite to the heart of, the truth that this country's political and military leaders have refused to face. What is inadequate is less the South Vietnamese system than the past history and present credibility of the current regime.
HUE—First came the civilian wave, running south from the doomed city of Quangtri, choking Highway 1 with tens of thousands of people, animals, furniture and food. They had to travel through a gantlet of fire, for North Vietnamese troops were dug in on both sides of the road, shooting ma chine guns and artillery. The road be came a slaughter house.
To the Editor:
LONDON, May 7—American bomb ing and shelling since 1965 have pro duced 21 million craters in South Vietnam.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 7—Five United States Army men who had been given up as dead ended a 13‐day ordeal in an enemy‐held jungle area last night and described their experiences today at a hos pital.
ABOARD AIR FORCE 86971, over the Atlantic, May 7—The mood aboard Secretary of State William P. Rogers's plane was surprisingly relaxed today de spite the sense of drama caused by President Nixon's decision this morning to summon him home from Bonn. Mr. Rogers sipped lemonade, joked withthe crew, told the four newsmen aboard about his college boxing days, joined his wife, Adele, atbridge, and remarked how glad he was to hear that Bobby Fischer had agreed to play against. Boris Spassky in Ice land for the chess champion ship.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, May 8—United States Navy F‐4 Phantom jets shot down three enemy MIG fight ers during two dogfights 50 to 75 miles southwest of Hanoi the United States command an nounced yesterday.
WASHINGTON, May 7—A national convention of wives and relatives of American prisoners of war adopted a strongly worded resolution to day expressing the members’ “extreme distress” at the failure of the Nixon Administration to obtain the release of the prisoners.
SAIGON, May 7 (AP) — De layed reports from the field said today that a United States F‐4 Phantom fighter‐bomber had attacked a South Vietna mese village by mistake on Friday, killing nine South Viet namese marines and wounding 21. The reports said that the incident took place at Mychanh on the northern defense line 20 miles north of Hue.
A South Vietnamese sol dier who ran away on March 31, the second day of the enemy invasion, hitches a ride in our car. Asked if he is returning to fight with his unit, he says no, he is only returning to try to col lect his pay. What if he gets arrested for desertion, he is asked. “I would rather go to jail than to the battlefield,” he replies.
HUE, South Vietnam, May. 5—The young American heli copter pilot, rescued by an other helicopter after having been shot down by North Vietnamese ground fire, was badly cut and bruised and in a state of shock.
WASHINGTON, May 7 (UPI) —The National Peace Action Coalition called today for a G.I. civilian solidarity day on May 20, with orderly joint antiwar demonstrations at Army bases throughout the country.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 7 (UPI)—Defense Minister Vo Nguyen Giap of North Vietnam, marking the 18th anniversary of the victory over the French at Dienbienphu, said today that “the Vietnamese people” had defeated three American ad ministrations and were in the process of finishing off “the war of Nixon.”
WASHINGTON, May 7 — President Nixon today called a meeting tomorrow morning of the National Security Council, the Government's principal for eign policy body, and sum moned Secretary of State Wil liam P. Rogers home from a European tour to attend it.
The president of the United Service Organizations said yes terday that charges made against U.S.O. personnel in Vietnam by a Wisconsin Con gressman were based on “gos sip” and “rumor.”
To the Editor:
BONN, May 7 (UPI) — The former commander in chief of the French Army in Indochina said today that America's material aid to South Vietnam was not enough to meet the military aid given the North Vietnamese by the Soviet Union.
A caller telephoned the New York Roman Catholic Archdiocese chancery last week and asked where to find members of the Sisters of Charity of New York. An official replied, “Have you looked on the floor of St. Patrick's Cathedral?”
HANOI, North Vietnam, Mon day, May 8—American planes raided the Hanoi area early to day, firing missiles at targets about six miles north of the city.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, May 8 (Reuters)— South Vietnamese military police opened fire on rioting prisoners of war on Phuquoc Island on Saturday, killing 13 and wounding 56, a Saigon miltary sipokesman said to day.
The prospect of further heavy bloodshed in South Vietnam and of a dangerous new escalation of the Indo china conflict—including the possible reintroduction of some American fighting men—places a heavy burden on leaders of every nation involved to leave no stone unturned in the effort to achieve a negotiated settlement.
Good evening.
In the slowest trading day this year, prices on the American Stock Exchange declined yesterday, with the index down 0.13 to close at 27.40. There was a mood of “wait and see” about the Vietnam conflict, with volume totaling only 3.1 million shares.
WASHINGTON, May 8 Vietnam‐era veterans received nearly 25 per cent of all new jobs created in the nation last year, yet their unemployment rate is still well above the national average of 5.6 per cent, the Nixon Administration said today.
WASHINGTON, May 8—Today we let the readers have their say:
It is Haiphong's status as the principal port of North Vietnam that makes it vital to both sides.
No One Knows,” said the headline in The New York Times, “What He Might Do.” And indeed, no one, including Secretary of State William Rogers, summoned home from Europe for a National Security Council meeting, could know what President Nixon might decide upon as antidote in the current crisis in South Vietnam. The press has described admiringly the range of explosive options open to him; members of his Administration had been hinting darkly of the terrible vengeance this unchecked Caesar might choose to wreak upon something abstract known only as “Hanoi” or “the enemy”; but the decision to mine North Vietnamese harbors was Richard Nixon's and Richard Nixon's alone.
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 8—In the five days since Lieut. Gen. Ngo Qang Truong took command in the embattled northern military region of South Vietnam, combat there has gradually renewed. No one says that the 43‐year‐old general will be able to pull together the troops who fled Qangtri and forge them Into a force that can win in what appears to be an imminent battle for the Former imperial capital of Hue.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 8 (AP)—Government troops today abandoned the town of Tani 58 miles southwest of Pnompenh, reportedly leaving the enemy a corridor more than 20 miles wide from mountain sanctuaries into the Mekong Delta of South Vietnam.
THANFIHOA, North Vietnam, May 8—In the bomb‐scarred provinces of Thanhhba and Naniha, where no military targets could be seen, this correspondent today visited a hospital and a school struck by American bombs.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 8 (Agence France‐Presse)—For 35 minutes today wave after wave of explosions could he heard at five‐minute intervals as United States planes attacked areas near the capital.
Club ‐ swinging policemen charged twice into the ranks of antiwar demonstrators who had marched down Broadway from Columbia University after President Nixon's speech on Vietnam last night as the protesters hurled stones at a bank and a police car.
PARIS, May 8—A North Vietnamese official today renewed Hanoi's demand that the United States halt the bombing of all North Vietnam and continued to maintain that the American raids—such as that today in the Hanoi area—were in violation of the 1968 agreements suspending the bombing and opening the way to peace talks here.
MOSCOW, May 8—The Soviet press today reported new American air raids near Hanoi and the meeting of the National Security Council in Washington without giving any indication to readers of an impending showdown that might jeopardize President Nixon's scheduled visit to Moscow on May 22.
WASHINGTON, May 8 President Nixon announced tonight that he had ordered the mining of all North Vietnamese ports and other measures to prevent the flow of arms and other military supplies to the enemy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 9—United States Navy fighter‐bombers struck at, North Vietnamese storage facilities, barracks and training facilities in an area about 15 miles west of Hanoi yesterday in the closest strikes to the North Vietnamese capital since April 16, the American command announced.
The stock market retreated yesterday in the slowest trading since the post‐Thanksgiving session of 1971 as uncertainties of the Vietnam war dampened investor sentiment.
WASHINGTON, May 8—The legal basis being cited here for President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnam's harbors is the “inherent right of collective self‐defense” contained in Article 51 of the United biadons Charter.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 8 (UPI)—The United States command said today that 2,700 American troops left South Vietnam last week, bringing the total strength down to 65,000, lowest in nearly seven years. But the combined strength of navy men, airmen and marines in Thailand and off shore was at its highest level of the war.
Quite apart from the critical situation in Vietnam, this is one of those rare weeks in history that could alter substantially the political shape of Europe and the course East‐West relations on that continent and beyond. Before it is over we shall know considerably more than we do now about the prospects for maintaining a viable NATO alliance, expanding the European Communities and furthering détente with the Soviet bloc.
The many dangers that lie ahead in Vietnam are exceeded only by the threat to the peace of the world if President Nixon's move last night to interdict war supplies to North Vietnam undermines the strategic arms limitation accord that has been virtually assured in Helsinki.
WASHINGTON, May 8—President Nixon's speech tonight appealed to the Soviet Union not to let its support of Hanoi lead it to a confrontation with the United States over his decision to try to cut off supplies to North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 8—Pentagon analysts say that while the mining of Haiphong and other harbors of North Vietnam, ordered tonight by President Nixon, may have a negligible effect on the war over the short run, its impact will be substantial over the long run.
FIRE BASE 42A, South Vietnam, May 8—The 200 or 300 South Vietnamese soldiers defending this advanced post between Kontum arid Pleiku make themselves as comfortable as possible by day knowing there is a strong possibility that they will die at night.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 8 — Rear Adm. Rembrandt C. Robinson, 47 years old, commander of the San Diego‐based cruiser‐destroyer Flotilla 11, was killed in a helicopter crash in the Tonkin Gulf tonight, the United States command announced.
JUNEAU, Alaska, May 8—Former Senator Ernest Gruening called today for President Nixon impeachment.
Interest rates edged higher in a slow session yesterday as the credit markets pondered the quickening economy and, or more immediate concern, the Vietnam war. The war, a factor in the market's performance since the beginning of the latest North Vietnamese offensive, came to the fore front yesterday and caused traders and investors to move with great caution. Little business was conduct ed after the announcement that President Nixon would address the nation on TV.
WASHINGTON, May 8—Sources in the antiwar movement indicated tonight that they expected to stage a major protest rally here in reaction to the steps announced by President Nixon tonight.
WASHINGTON, May 8 (UPI) —Citing what he said was a memo from the United States military command, a Congressman charged today that American officials in South Vietnam were ordered last fall to “distort the truth” by developing information to show that the Vietnamization program was doing very well.
WASHINGTON, May 8—President Nixon was alternately praised tonight by members of Congress for his firm leadership and accused of setting the nation on a dangerous confrontation with the Soviet Union that could lead to world war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9—President. Nguyen Van Thieu tonight asked for emergency powers that would allow him to issue decrees subject to subsequent approval by the National Assembly.
DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania, May 9 (Agence France‐Presse) — Tanzania today criticized President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnamese ports as a threat to the lives of the Indochinese people and to all humanity. A Government statement said the United States actions were leading to an increase in acts of killing and sggression.
WASHINGTON, May 9 (UPI) —Vice President Agnew rejected today a gift bedspread from Gov. Kenneth M. Curtis of Maine, accusing the Democratic Governor of encouraging an antiwar demonstration that marred his recent visit to the state.
WASHINGTON, May 9—The Defense Department said today that it was unaware of the alleged attacks on Chinese freighters. A Pentagon spokesman said that the only possibility was that the vessels had been caught in the middle of a United States air strike on a North Vietnamese coastal installation, but that “we certainly did not target any Chinese ships.”
LONDON, May 9—President Nixon's decision to mine ports and bomb rail lines in North Vietnam won little support in Europe today. Most comment, official and unofficial, expressed regret that he had chosen to open a new phase of military action in the war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9 — C‐130 transport planes flying at 8,000 feet dropped food and ammunition today to the besieged South Vietnamese troops in Anloc, 60 miles north of Saigon.
WASHINGTON, May 9—The Nixon Administration acknowledged today that the President's decision to seal off North Vietnam's harbors had caused a serious problem for Soviet policy‐makers and endangered the course of SovietAmerican relations, but said it still hoped that Mr. Nixon could go ahead with his trip to Moscow, as planned, 13 days from now.
WASHINGTON, May 9—Even though he began to move nearly a week ago toward his decision to mine the harbors of North Vietnam, President Nixon did not give the final signal to the military to execute the plan until nearly 2 P.M. yesterday—seven hours before his speech to the nation and minutes after a final, sober private talk with the two men who were closest to him during his deliberations.
In ordering the closing of land and sea supply routes to North Vietnam by American military action, President Nixon is taking a desperate gamble that alters the entire nature of the war, that risks the fundamental security and deepest interests of the United States for dubious and tenuous gains, and that runs counter both to Congressional mandate and to the will and conscience a large segment of the American people.
PARIS, May 9—Following, in unofficial translation from the French, is the text of an official commentary made public today by the North Vietnamese delegation to the peace talks here in reply to President Nixon's address last night:
Rear Adm. Rembrandt C. Robinson, who was killed Monday in the Tonkin Gulf, was the first officer of flag rank to be killed in Vietnam, according to the Navy.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., May 9 — Secretary General Waldheim said today that “the time has now come when the full machinery of the United Nations should be used” to end the war in Vietnam.
To the Editor: Nothing more clearly indicates the double standard many otherwise intelligent people apply to the Vietnam war than the reaction to the sad news [April 26] that the Mylai residents who survived the Calley massacre and were rebuilding their lives with American aid have now been overrun and massacred by the Vietcong.
PARIS, May 9—The basic and thus far unnegotiable demand of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong delegations here—that President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam leave office—remains at the center of the deadlock in private and public sessions of the. Paris talks.
WASHINGTON, May 9—Attempts to stop the flow of men, weapons and supplies over land routes by the use of air power have uniformly failed throughout the history of the Korea and Vietnam wars.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9—American military officers and South Vietnamese officials today approved President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnamese harbors, but doubts were expressed that the step would force an early end to the enemy's offensive within South Vietnam.
PARIS, May 9 — European gold, stock and currency markets reacted sharply today to President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnamese ports.
PARIS, May 9—North Vietnam declared today that “the Vietnamese people will never accept Mr. Nixon's ultimatum.”
Concern over Vietnam developments sent stocks down yesterday on the American Stock Exchange. The index fell 0.33 to 27.07. This decline was the biggest since Aug. 3, 1971, when the index dropped 0.35. Yesterday's volume totaled 5,945,835, up from 3,147,410 on Monday, a slow trading day.
The commodities futures market for the most part proceeded cautiously yesterday following the President's military action in Vietnam. Trading in general was slow.
LONDON, May 9 (Reuters)—Radio stations in Eastern Europe were unanimous today in condemning President Nixon's new moves in Vietnam, and several forecast that they would jeopardize the chances of success of his visit to the Soviet Union this month.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 9 (Agence France‐Presse)—The loudspeakers of Hanoi spoke out at 7:50 A.M. today, warning the inhabitants that “enemy planes” were 32 miles to the southeast.
PHUHOA, South Vietnam, May 9—The women and children of this dusty, sunbaked village stood anxiously by the road with bundles of their meager possessions today, waiting for, the bus to Saigon and safety. North. Vietnamese troops attacked Phuhoa last night and promised to return soon.
With mass marches, windowsmashing sprees, silent vigils and traffic‐blocking sit‐ins, antiwar protesters by the thousands took to the streets yesterday in response to President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnamese ports.
As Senator George McGovern becomes a more credible contender for the Presidency—especially if the Vietnam war drags—Wall Street and the business community have begun to worry about his “populist” economic proposals. These include heavier taxation of capital gains; heavier gift and inheritance taxes; closing what he describes as “$28‐billion in tax loopholes far the rich and pow erful”; raising the corporate income tax; phasing out oil, gas, mineral and other depletion allowances; and eliminating the recently enacted investment tax credit, accelerated depreciation and deferral of taxes on export earnings through DISCS—Domestic International Sales Corporations.
WASHINGTON, May 9—Henry A. Kissinger today described the peace proposal outlined by President Nixon last night as a modification of previous American offers and said it would “leave the determination of Vietnam's political future to the Vietnamese.”
The nation's securities and commodities markets weakened yesterday in response to President Nixon's announcement of new military initiatives in North Vietnam.
WARSAW, May 9 (UPI)—The Government of Poland, which is to play host to President Nixon later this month, privately voiced anxiety today over “complications” caused by the United States decision to blockade North Vietnamese ports.
Stock prices buckled yesterday in reaction to President Nixon's address Monday night announcing the mining of North Vietnamese ports and other measures taken to prevent the flow of arms and military supplies to the enemy.
WASHINGTON, May 9—Senate Democrats today passed by a vote of 29 to 14 a resolution “disapproving the escalation of the war in Vietnam.”
The bond market regained yesterday afternoon much of the ground lost earlier in the first reaction to President Nixon's decision to seal off North Vietnamese ports.
To the Editor: The Ivy League presidents have rendered a great service to higher education in their joint statement of April 19 deploring renewed American bombing of North Vietnam and its civilian population. Making this forthright declaration obviously took tremendous courage.
WASHINGTON, May 9—American military analysts say that the Soviet Union and China have a number, of options in responding to the mining of the ports of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnamo Wednesday, May 10—Two hundred United States fighterbombers ranged over North Vietnam yesterday from the demilitarized zone to Hanoi in a heavy bombing and minelaying campaign aimed at cutting road and rail links with China and blocking the ports.
MOSCOW, May 9—Tass, the Soviet press agency, today criticized President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnamese ports as a violation of international law, but gave no indication whether the move would force the cancellation of Mr. Nixon's scheduled trip to Moscow in two weeks.
HELSINKI; Einiand, May 9—President Nixon's decision to nine North Vietnamese ports was not mentioned When United. States and Soviet negotiators met today for an hour at the talks on limitation of strategic arms, a conference source said.
WASHINGTON, May 9—Following are excerpts from the official transcript of the news conference held today by Henry A. Kissinger, the President's adviser on national security, in the White House. Mr. Kissinger's opening remarks are followed by questions and answers.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 9—The senior American adviser to Saigon's hard‐pressed forces in the Central Highlands said today that it would take several months before President Nixon's decision to mine the Haiphong harbor would have any effect on the campaign here.
To the Editor: In 1857 the U.S. Supreme Court dispatched Dred Scott back into slavery with Chief Justice Taney's illustrious dictum: A black man “has no rights white men are bound to respect.”
CHICAGO, May 9—Two hundred men disrupted a two‐day Vietnam Veterans job fair shortly after it opened today, chanting “We want jobs now” and upsetting tables and curtain partitions.
So much has been said about President Nixon's new military moves in Vietnam that his new and more specific peace terms may be overlooked and underestimated. For while he talked in warrior language about the “arrogance” and insolence of Hanoi, and backed his warnings with a military challenge to the sea‐borne Soviet arms in Haiphong and the rail supplies from China, he also offered what amounts to a date‐certain for the “complete withdrawal of all American forces from Vietnam within four months.”
To the Editor: Prof. Edward Early's analogy between American support of South Vietnam and the conduct of an intermeddler who persuades one of a pair of quarrelling spouses to disregard a reconciliation agreement (letter, May 1) is an example of a misconception cornmonly encountered in academic circles.
OTTAWA, May 9 — Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau rejected demands by opposition critics today that he make statement on President Nixion's order to mine North Vietnamese harbors.
NEW HAVEN, Conn.—Outrage over the new American escalation by bombing and mining of North Vietnam has unfortunately inhibited analysis of American strategy. The President's decision to concentrate available air and naval power from all over the world in the vicinity of Vietnam was in all probability made coolly and unemotionally in the White House and not, as some have suggested, as the frustrated response of a man prone to temper tantrums.
WASHINGTON, May 9—President Nixon's newest tactics in Indochina derive from a recognition that three years of military and diplomatic maneuver against North Vietnam have failed.
WASHINGTON, May 10 —Democrats on the House Foreign Affairs Committee voted, 10 to 1, today in favor of a proposal that would require the withdrawal of all American forces from Indochina by Oct. 1 if American prisoners of war are released by North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam — I have been here in Saigon for more than three year's except for a trip to the States to wind up my affairs there.
Nothing could have indicated more clearly and convincingly the complete bankruptcy of the foreign policy of the present Administration than President Nixon's throwing caution to the winds by mining Haiphong harbor and thus, in effect, blockading it in violation of a long‐established and unin versally recognized principle of international law, namely, that ports may be legally blockaded only during an officially declared war and after due warning has been given to neutral nations.
WASHINGTON, May 10 (UPI) —Pentagon sources said today that at least one Soviet ship in Haiphong Harbor and possibly more, might have been caught in cross‐fire between United States mine‐laying planes and North Vietnamese shore batteries.
HONG KONG, Thursday, May 11 (UPI)—A London‐registered freighter with a crew of 40 has left the mine‐threatened North Vietnamese port of Haiphong, a marine department spokesman said today.
Romulo Betancourt, the former President of Venezuela, ended eight years of voluntary exile in Europe and headed home. The 63‐year‐old Mr. Betancourt, who relinquished the presidency in 1964, left Bern, Switzerland, for Genoa, by car, anal planned to board a ship there for Latin America.
UNITED NATIONS, N. y., May 10—Huang Hua, chief representative of China here, conferred for an hour today with Secretary General Waldheim on the war in Vietnam. Mr. Huang refused to comment on the prospects of calling a meeting of the Security Council to deal with the matter.
PARIS, May 10 — Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, head of the Viettaing delegation to the Paris peaces: talks today denounced President Nixon's address on, Vietnam Monday as a “speech of war” and categorically rajected his new proposal.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 10 — As South Vietnamese commanders continued their hectic attempts to rebuild the weakened defenses of Hue, an American military official predicted today that the North Vietnamese would begin their assault on this crucial city within week, and perhaps in the next few days.
WASHINGTON, May 10—Evidence has begun to emerge here that United States intelligence was caught by surprise by the direction, timing and power of the North. Vietnamese offensive in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, May 11—United States planes bombed targets in Hanoi and Haiphong yesterday and also struck at the rail lines leading from China in a continued effort to seal off North Vietnam from its sources of military supplies.
HONG KONG, May 11—China today branded President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnam harbors as a “dangerous move” and a “flagrant provocation against the people of Vietnam and the world over.”
MOSCOW, May 10—The delay in official Soviet reaction to President Nixon's decision to mine harbors in North Vietnam was interpreted by Western diplomats today as a sign of difficulty in the, Kremlin over how to cope with the American move.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 10—President Nguyen Van Thieu imposed martial law on South Vietnam tonight.
Only two months ago Washington presented the Saigon Army one of the best in the world and “Vietnamization” as a great success making gigantic progress. The Government In the South was asserting that only an infinitely small minority of the population was not under its control. In short, some 13 or 14 million tons of bombs and other munitions, chemical spraying of a seventh of South Vietnam's territory, the influx of dollars and military equipment and the repression of legal opposition had at last defeated “Communism” and at last the theory of “two Vietnams” would be vindicated.
TOKYO, May 10 (UPI) —I North Vietnam's press agency said today that 32 civilians, mostly women and children, were killed in Hanoi's suburban district of Gialam during the American bombing raids.
ESCANABA, Mich., May 10 —Gov. George C. Wallace of Alabama took his Presidential campaign into Michigan's northern reaches today with speeches to large crowds here and in Marquette.
HANOI, North. Vietnam, May 10—The sounds of jets and bombing began at 9:50 A.M. today, and smoke could be seen rising several miles west of Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, May 10‐A senior official said today that the Administration believed agreements would eventually be reached on strategic‐arms limitation, an expansion in trade and other matters now under negotiation with the Soviet Union even if th' President's trip to Moscow is called off by Soviet leaders.
PARIS, May 10—The dollar came under selling pressure again today, but the recent spectacular advance in gold was halted as nervousness over intensification of hostilities in Vietnam continued to dominate sentiment in the European market centers.
NEW DELHI, May 10—Foreign Miniiter Swaran Singh said in Parliament today that India condemned the latest escalation” by the United States of the Vietnam war. He spoke after the Cabinet had discussed the American mining of North Vietnamese harbors.
I want to make five points before taking your questions this morning.
WASHINGTON, May 10—President Nixon finished his somewhat scary speech on Vietnam Monday night with an appeal for the support of the people. He deserves it. He is in a most difficult position, and he is, as Presidents have become fond of reminding us, the only, President we have.
Protests mounted yesterday against President Nixon's new Vietnam actions, with demonstrations in city streets and on campuses across the country.
For the second consecutive day, antiwar protests convulsed cities and college campuses across the country yesterday as demonstrators blocked highways, occupied buildings, and —at night—fought against club‐wielding policemen under clouds of tear gas.
MEMPHIS, May 10—Harold S. Geneen, chairman and president of the International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, was sharply criticized today by a succession of stockholders over the company's role as a supplier of war equipment.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 10—The Saigon Government today ordered an immediate change in the military command in the Central Highlands, where enemy pressure has been steadily mounting.
WASHINGTON, May 10 —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, perhaps influenced by the sports‐mindedness of President Nixon, twice turned to sporting expressions at his news conference today to describe military activities in Vietnam.
Bond prices staged a general, though restrained, advance yesterday that left most interest rates at about the levels that prevailed before President Nixon announced his new Vietnam strategy Monday night.
WASHINGTON, May 10—Visitors were barred for three hours this afternoon from the galleries of the House of Representatives to prevent a recurrence of yesterday's disruptions in which 40 antiwar protesters were ejected.
WASHINGTON, May 10 —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that “we will take those actions that are necessary to stop the supplies of equipment to North Vietnam,” whether by airlift or by any ships that might evade American mines.
A questioner at Henry Kissinger's news conference recalled that, for ten years and through three Administrations, mining the North Vietnamese harbors had been considered to pose an unacceptable risk of confrontation with the Soviet Union. “Can you tell us, what has changed to make that risk now acceptable?” he asked.
HONG KONG, May 10. —the first press comment from Hanoi on President Nixon's deicision to mine North Vietnamese ports, Nhan Dan, theCommunist party organ, described it today as “a pratice act” that was “pregnant with, dangerous consequences for the U. S.”
MOSCOW, May 11—Following, as translated by The New Yorlz Times, is the text of a statement on Vietnam by the Soviet Government, as distributed today by Tass, the official press agency:
CHICOPEE, Mass., May 11—John William Ward, president of Amherst College, and his wife were arrested today for their part in an early morning antiwar demonstration that blocked the entrance to the Westover. Air Force Base near here.
ROME, May 11—Pope Paul VI appealed today for the avoidance of a big‐power challenge over Vietnam and in the Middle East “at all costs.”
MYCHANH, South Vietnam, May 11 — As the locusts screeched from the tamarind trees in the heavy heat, South Vietnamese marines dozed in their hammocks, played Chinese chess or, strumming guitars, sang sentimental popular songs.
Moscow may yet change its mind; but meanwhile there is welcome evidence of restrained reaction to the challenge President Nixon posed to the Soviet Union with his risky decision Monday to mine the harbors North Vietnam. The threat of confrontation is by no means dissipated; but at least there were encouraging signs yesterday suggesting that the Presidential visit to the Soviet capital may take place as scheduled.
FLINT, Mich., May 11—Senator George McGovern sought today to drive the school busing issue out of the forefront of the Michigan primary race and replace it with concern over the Vietnam war.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 11—The Soviet‐Vietnamese Friendship Hospital and its grounds had a surrealistic appearance today, with roofs, masonry, trees and vehicles twisted and riddled with shrapnel.
PARIS—Unable to square the Vietnames circle, President Nixon apparentiy, hopes to triangulate it. Addressing himself particularly to Russia and China, Hanoi's great power backers, he opened wider the doors marked “war” and “peace” and seemed to suggest a choice. Judging by their actions, not their protestations, the Communist behemoths have so far chosen peace.
WASHINGTON, May 11—A high‐ranking Soviet official conferred with President Nixon about trade matters today and said later that there was no reason to doubt that Mr. Nixon's trip to Moscow would take place as planned, 11 days from now.
The Naval quarantine proclaimed by President Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 was, like President Nixon's mining of North Vietnamese harbors, an interdiction of Soviet shipping that risked the nightmare of nuclear war. There all resemblance ends.
WASHINGTON, May II, (UPI)—Nine former members of Henry A'Kissinger's staff denounced the mining of North Vietnamese harbors today as a “fruitless and ill‐conoeiyed effort to preserve the President's concept of American Presidential prestige.”
MOSCOW, May 11—The Soviet Union demanded today that the United States immediately end the “blockade” and bombing of North Vietnam, but gave no indication that it planned to cancel President Nixon's scheduled visit here on May 22.
WASHINGTON, May 11—The State Department asserted today that President Nixon's latest proposal for a peace settlement in Vietnam, outlined in a speech Monday, had relaxed rather than stiffened the United States terms for a negotiated agreement.
On May 8, 1972 U.S. President Nixon brazenly ordered the mining of the ports of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, the cutting off of the land and water communications of North Vietnam and the intensification of air and naval strikes. This is a new grave step taken by the United States in escalating its war of aggression against Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, May 12—South Vietnam was placed on stringent emergency status last night.
HONOLULU, May 11 (UPI) —Fifty antiwar demonstrators scuffled with the police at the Kahala Hilton today and cursed Vice President Agnew when he appeared on the hotel balcony.
WASHINGTON, May 11—Thronging the steps and roaming the halls of the Capitol, antiwar demonstrators protested and lobbied today for an end to the war.
For the time being at least, peace demonstrators and the Police Department seem to have reached, if not a rapport, then perhaps an understanding.
LONDON, May 11 (AP)—The British Government has instructed its Ambassador in Peking to hold immediate talks with Chinese officials on the Vietnam crisis.
WASHINGTON, May 11—The first Soviet response to the mining of North Vietnam's waters is being read here as delaying action, probably to buy time for secret diplomacy.
PARIS, May 11—North Vietnam tonight released an antiwar statement it said was signed by eight pilots who are being held captive in Hanoi. It was the first time in 18 months that the Hanoi Government has given any public indication of the location of a prisoner facility.
WASHINGTON, May 11—The Defense Department reported today that five vessels, four of them Russian, left the principal North. Vietnamese port of Haiphong before American‐laid mines blocking the harbor channel became active at 6 A.M., Eastern daylight time.
Radio station WRVR‐FM will present today a 15‐hour editorial campaign against United States involvement in Vietnam.John Wicklein, the station's general manager.
DANANG; South Vietnam, May 11 — Hong Huu Vinh was a teacher, Bui Van Nam was a farmer and Tran Khanh was a prosperous business man Now they are all refugees —three of the some 400,000 Who hive crowded into the banang area in recent days Since the fall of Queried Province to the invading North Vietnainese.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 11 —The United States today began moving out many of the 2,800 American advisers and support troops stationed here as the North Vietnamese offensive came closer to this Central Highlands city.
WASHINGTON, May 11—The Soviets are playing a very clever waiting game with President Nixon. They are spanking him publicly for his latest air offensive against North Vietnam, but corresponding with him privately, allowing their officials to get their pictures taken with him at the White House, and acting in general like disappointed friends dealing with a misguided and reckless child.
President Nixon and Defense Department officials were directed by a Federal district judge here yesterday to demonstrate why they should not halt the bombing of North Vietnam and the mining of its coastal waters.
WASHINGTON, May 11 —The Senate majority leader, Mike Mansfield, who returned “vast weekend from a 16‐day tour of China, said today that the step‐up of the Vietnam war had “thrown into at least temporary eclipse” the possibility, of improved relations between Washington and Peking.
Protests against President Nixon's escalation of the Vietnarn, war continued across the country yesterday, amid signs mounting frustration and violence on both sides.
MONTREAL, May 11 — The re‐escalation of the Vietnam war will probably not require a significant increase in United States military spending or an increase in taxes next year, Herbert Stein, chairman of President Nixon's Council of Economic Advisers, said here today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, May 12—Hundreds of United States planes struck at highways, railroads and supply storage facilities over a wide area of North Vietnam yesterday.
Prices on the American Stock Exchange moved up yesterday for the second day in a row, recovering from their slump earlier in the week on news of the Government's new policy in Vietnam. Yesterday the index closed at 27.32, up 0.12 following a Wednesday rise of 0.13.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., May 11—China today rejected any role for the United Nations in attempting to end the war in Vietnam.
PEKING, Friday, May 12—The Chinese Government early today condemned the new United States air and naval operations against North Vietnam.
The bond market continued yesterday to shake off the effects of President Nixon's Monday night address on Vietnam and managed another small advance.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 11 (UPI)—The United States command said that 19 Americans were killed in action in Indochina last week, 17 more than the week before and the highest United States death toll in seven months.
TOKYO, May 11 — Premier Eisaku Sato said today that he doubted the wisdom of President Nixon's order to stop the flow of supplies to North Vietnam and expressed the hope that the move would not turn the Vietnam conflict into “an endless war.”
PARIS, May 12—Following, in unofficial translation from the Vietnamese, are excerpts from a news conference held today by Le Duc Tho, chief negotiator for the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace conference:
WASHINGTON, May 12—The Defense Department said today that several merchant ships on the way to North Vietnam had apparently changed course to avoid running Into the American‐laid mines. In that country's harbors.
LONDON—One striking aspect of President Nixon's decision to mine the harbors of North Vietnam, and the manner of its taking, was his contempt for the concept of law. He did not even attempt to justify in international legal terms what stood, unless justified in some way, as an act of outlawry. Domestically he showed not the slightest deference, in committing this formal act of war, to the Constitution's requirement that Congress declare war.
The Rev. Daniel Berrigan, on parole after serving a prison term for burning draft records, flew to Paris last night to meet, he said, with representatives from the North Vietnamese Government.
While students and other antiwar protesters are taking to the streets to express their opposition to President Nixon's Indochina policy, Presidential aides boast of heavy support for the mining of Haiphong in telegrams and other messages to the White House. While it is questionable whether the claimed 5‐to‐1 favorable response truly represents the national mood, the men responsible for national policy in the White House and Congress will never know differently so long as dissent exhausts itself in random street demonstrations that’ too often result self‐defeating violence.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 12 — A Canadian official said today that much of Hanoi had been evacuated.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, May 13—United States fighter‐bombers have reportedly cut North Vietnam's northeastern rail link with China by knocking out a bridge.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 12 (Agence France‐Presse) —The streets of Hanoi were deserted this morning as highflying American planes passed overhead. The crowing of a cock could be head. The antiaircraft batteries were silent.
MOBILE, Ala., May 12—The lobby of the municipal auditorium was plastered with campaign posters. Inside, the organ struck up a boisterous tune, and delegates rose from their seats and marched through the aisles singing and carrying placards for the favorite candidate.
PARIS, May 12—Le Due Tho, a leading member of the North Vietnamese politburo, today rejected President Nixon's latest proposal for a settlement in Vietnam, but said that he would stay on in Paris and was ready for serious negotiations.
MOSCOW, May 12 (AP)—Xuan Thuy, head of North Vietnam's delegation to the Paris peace talks, left today for Hanoi after a two‐day stopover.
CLEVELAND, May 12—Rabbi Arthur Hertzberg, elected today as president of the American Jewish Congress, is a scholar, an author and, according to his associates, one of the nation's most outspoken preachers. Spiritual leader of Temple Emanu‐EI in Englewood, N. J., since 1956, the rabbi angered many of his suburban congregants in 1963 by warning, in a Yom Kippur sermon, against United States involvement in Vietnam. Those whose feathers were ruffled were not only hawks but also those who saw the synagogue as a place for worship, not controversy, particularly during the high holy days.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 12 (UPI)—The evacuation of Hanoi, carried out by Government vehicles, began with the American air strikes of April 16, a diplomatic source said here today.
An easing of tension over the Vietnam situation enabled the stock market yesterday to score an upturn, with advances outnumbering declines by more than a 2‐to‐1 ratio.
PARIS, May 12—The North Vietnamese and the Vietcong insist that they do not want to impose a Communist or socialist government in Saigon. President Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger, his chief adviser for national security, say they do.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 12 (Reuters)—Roman Catholic officials yesterday denied as unfounded a report by a senior United States official that two French missionaries had been crucified by North Vietnamese troops.
AMHERST, Mass—I know you attend to what I say because I am president of the college. I thank you for that, but I want to speak to you in two voices. First, as president of Amherst College; second, in my own voice. I am tense and uneasy with the act of dividing myself in two: My hope, as president, has been not to lose myself in the role, the office, to retain a sense of my own self while still president. My personal unease is made worse because as I said at the start, I know you listen to me because I am the president. It is not Bill Ward you want to hear: You want to hear the president of Amherst College. So, let me begin first with the voice you want to hear, that of the president, and then speak as Bill Ward.
Monday evening President Nixon made a speech. On the 11 P.M. edition of WABC TV's “Eyewitness News,” co‐anchorman Roger Grimsby announced that “the nation's stomach shrunk to the size of a walnut tonight.” If indeed so, there was also a noticeable swelling in the ambitions of broadcast Journalism.
WASHINGTON, May 12—Efforts to maintain some semblance or party unity in the Democratic Congressional delegation from. New York have been postponed because of the primary election.
WASHINGTON, May 12 (AP) —After some adjustments, the Soviet Union and China could get enough war matériel and food into North Vietnam by rail to make up for seaborne supplies cut off by the mining of North Vietnamese ports, United States military and civilian specialists believe.
Antiwar demonstrators fought with the police yesterday outside a San Francisco hotel where President Nixon's California campaign for re‐election was being opened by. Gov. Ronald Reagan and New York's Governor Rockefeller.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 12 (UPI) — The United States command announced today that it would no longer provide information about the mining of seven North. Vietnamese ports. It said that such information would be available only in Washington.
LAIKHE, South Vietnam, May 12—A gigantic crush of firepower has fallen on the town of Anloc in the rubber plantation country 60 miles north of Saigon, where the remnants of eight battalions of South Vietnamese troops are surrounded.
A Harris poll says that 59 per cent of the American people supported President Nixon's decision to mine North Vietnam's harbors, it was reported yesterday.
WASHINGTON—The grand strategy to Vietnamize the South was supplanted last week by the frantic effort to ostracize the North to cut oft Hanoi's supplies by sea and land and sever it psychologically from its Soviet and Chinese allies.
INTERNATIONAL problems—in the Vietnam situation and in the continuing debate over world monetary reform— weighed down heavily on the financial markets last week and dampened sentiment throughout the business and economic communities.
MOSCOW, May 13—Days before President Nixon's scheduled arrival in Moscow, Yuri Zhukov, the prominent Pravda commentator, answered listeners’ questions on foreign affairs on a television program without once mentioning the forthcoming trip.
To the Editor: Listening to comments from adversaries of President Nixon's latest move in Indochina over the media, I am amazed at the reactions, which are so obvious, and exactly what the President hoped to generate, as they will make his “victory” more dramatic.
To the Editor: President Nixon's decision to mine the harbors of North Vietnam and curb Hanoi's ability to wage aggressive war is a courageous one. It also marks a historic turning point. No longer need there be fear of America's retreat from responsibility and greatness.
WASHINGTON, May 13—If there is any redeeming quality about this goofy nuclear age, it is that Moscow and Washington seem to know when to hold back when one of them risks a major collision with the other. They, both go crazy from time to time, but not together.
BOSTON, May 13 (AP)—A bill adding $10‐million to the Vietnam veterans bonus program, on which $40‐million has already been spent, received final approval this week.
Although six buildings had been occupied and more than 50 students arrested in the course of nearly four weeks of antiwar demonstrations at Columbia University, the campus remained relatively quiet last week in the wake of President Nixon's announcement of the mining of North Vietnam's harbors.
The public rejection by the Vietcong of President Nixon's latest peace proposal was to be expected at a moment when blockade and air attack are intensifying the American war against North Vietnam. But Moscow, reacting relatively moderately to the war's escalation, has urged resumption of negotiations while refraining, so far, from canceling the Nixon‐Brezhnev summit. North Vietnam's chief secret negotiator, Politburo member Le Duc Tho, remains in Paris, having sent Minister Xuan Thuy instead to Hanoi for consultations. Another round In the Paris peace talks undoubtedly lies ahead and the latest American offer could become the opening for a settlement.
Michael Mayhew of Brooklyn is 22 years old, black, untrained, a veteran of the Vietnam War—and looking for a job.
YORBA LINDA, Calif., May 13—A bomb hoax this week caused a hurried evacuation of the house where President Nixon was born, while antiwar demonstrators shouted slogans outside and a Vietcong flag was run up a memorial flag pole on the lawn.
WASHINGTON—The scenario was hauntingly familiar. Once again the President appeared on nationwide television to announce a major escalation of the Vietnam war, and once again his words triggered the predictable sequence of events that have become a fixture of American life.
SAIGON — “Our objective is to have an impact on the battle in the country as fast as possible,” a senior American officer said the other day, explaining what President Nixon had in mind when he ordered the mining of the seven North Vietnamese ports and extensive bombing of supply lines north of the demilitarized zone (DMZ).
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 13—United States commanders here say that North Vietnam has repeatedly blundered in its use of tanks during the current offensive, but at least some American field advisers feel the enemy may have learned enough to pose a grave threat to Pleiku and other cities of the Central Highlands.
WASHINGTON, May 13—The mines recently sown by United States aircraft in Haiphong and six other North Vietnamese ports are designed to deactivate themselves before President Nixon's planned trip to Moscow on May 22, responsible informants said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, May 14—The battle for Kontum began today with combined tank and infantry assault on the Central Highlands city by North Vietnamese forces. But according to initial reports the first attack was beaten back with heavy enemy losses.
TOKYO, Sunday, May 14 (AP)—Peking reported today that the people and the armed forces of North Vietnam were able to maintain “smooth traffic” in transportation despite “wanton bombing” by the United States.
MIAMI, May 13—A small flotilla of antiwar demonstrators dropped balloons into Biscayne Bay off President Nixon's Key Biscayne compound today as a symbolic protest against the United States mining of North Vietnamese waters.
LONDON, May 13—Roy Jenkins, former deputy leader of the Labor party, deplored today what he called “the tragic misdirection of effort” of President Nixon's policy in Vietnam. Saying he spoke “as a friend and not as a natural critic of the United States,” he said:
Protesters against the increased action by the United States in the Vietnam war gave up sit‐ins and street battles for speeches under sunny skies yesterday, as peaceful marches and rallies were held in a dozen cities across the country.
SAN FRANCISCO, May 13 (UPI)—The Republican National Chairman, Senator Robert Dole of Kansas, denounced today what he called “an attempted media sabotage” of President Nixon's Vietnam policies and said “it could cost the lives” of American soldiers.
Not since the Civil War has any American war inspired so much impassioned poetry as the struggle in Vietnam, much of it (like armaments) produced by civilians, the most of whom have assumed the spread‐dove or cruciform position of the rampant pacifist, hurling non serviam into the slack jaws of pale‐faced bureaucrats. For a while there, to Write Against the War was rather expected of a poet, a sort of metrical means of putting yourself on the line. WestCoast Poet Laureate and EastCoast Poet Laureate did it quite regularly for a period, but they don't do it much anymore. Nor were these war poems, however well‐meant, particularly memorable. A sort of violent occasional verse, most war poetry like most speeches seems to suffer rapid rigor mortis, assuming the stiff postures and bloated quality of all dead verse. No need to name names here.
Passage of an effective‐ end‐the‐war amendment in the Senate looked possible earlier this week; and after President Nixon's announcement that he had mined the North Vietnamese harbors, even the Democrats on the House Foreign Affairs Committee—not a citadel of doves—voted for a withdrawal resolution.
A few years ago, at a university conference portentously titled “Poetry and the National Conscience,” one of the middle‐aging poets on the panel announced that, as a subject for poems, the Vietnam War was dead. All of us were veterans of many a Reading Against the War, and who wasn't weary of civilian rhetoric and accusatory bombast? Our moral indignation seems as impotent as a spent shell; the war drags on like a congenital disease. But the troops were yet to be heard from.
AMONG the ever‐increasing scores of graves in Mac Dinh Chi cemetery, the oldest and most prestigious one in Saigon, now spread across several blocks near the American Embassy in the downtown area, are two unmarked slabs of marble around which miscellaneous mourners occasionally place wreaths or scatter a few flowers. Each week fresh pots of blooming plants are set on the tombstones by the gravekeepers, who are paid by members of the family of President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam and his Rasputinlike brother and closest advisor, Ngo Dinh Nhu, both of whom were murdered in midmorning of Nov. 2, 1963, approximately 20 hours after the start of the military coup that overthrew them.
Since the United States is presumed to act in harmony with its national values, Americans have difficulty believing that we are committed to a counterrevolution that sustains an oligarchy in power by making war on the rural people of Vietnam.
DANANG, South Vietnam Sunday, May 14 —About 1,000 South Vietnamese Marines made a surprise attack yesterday in enemy‐held territory southeast of Quangtri city, which the North Vietnamese captured 14 days ago.
DENVER, May 13 (AP)—The American Baptist Convention, the first religious denomination to hold a national meeting since President Nixon's quarantine of North Vietnam harbors, decided today against taking any stand on the conflict in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 11 — Phan Dinh Nao and his wife, their four chilthen and their daughter's child live in a truck parked on Phan Thanh Gian Street, one of Saigon's busiest.
PARIS—Seventeen years ago, that hardy political perennial, Harold Stassen, headed President Eisenhower's Foreign Operations Administration and was worrying about Vietnam. He told me (Jan. 13, 1955):
DETROIT, May 13 (UPI)—Representative Shirley Chisholm began the last weekend of campaigning for Tuesday's Presidential primary today with a series of short appearances in the Detroit area. At Kennedy Square in downtown Detroit, the Brooklyn Democrat told a crowd of about 500 that the Vietnam war was a war “we can't win.”
TOKYO, May 13—Vice President Agnew was assured in talks here today with Premier Eisaku Sato and Foreign Minister Takeo Fukuda that Japan would continue to support the United States position in Vietnam.
MOSCOW, May 13—The Moscow radio said tonight that eight Soviet freighters were on their way from Black Sea ports, to Haiphong, the principal North Vietnamese harbor mined by the United States.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, May 13—A number of developments left it unclear today whether the Soviet Union had decided to test the sealing off of North Vietnam's harbors by the United States or whether, in fact, the Russians and Americans had reached an agreement on allowing the passage of supplies to the north.
BRUSSELS, May 14— The outlook for a solid rally on the Eurobond market is continuing to improve with new issues in all sectors favorably received and prices on the secondary market firm despite the money and stock market jitters following President Nixon's latest moves in Vietnam.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 14 (UPI)—Government troops fought a fierce battle with Communists today at Kirivong in the south of Cambodia, only four miles from the South Vietnamese border, a Government spokesman said.
Some of the nation's religious leaders have voiced grave concern over President Nixon's war policy in Southeast Asia and the bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, May 15—South Vietnarnese troops, in their second counterattack of the weekend against Communist forces, pushed out from two points southwest of Hue yesterday in an effort to disrupt enemy preparations for an attack on the city.
DENVER, May 14 — The American Baptist Convention ended its annual meeting here today without acting on two opposing statements on Vietnam that had prompted considerable debate.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 14 —Government troops moved out from two points southwest of Hue today and by nightfall had advanced to within half a mile of Fire Base Bastogne, which fell to the enemy more than two weeks ago.
PEKING, May 14 (Agence France‐Presse) —Premier Chou En‐lai today described the mining of North Vietnam's ports as a serious step‐up of the war by the United States.
ST. LOUIS, May 14 —Two well‐known St. Louis residents and an antiwar veterans group have taken legal action aimed to forc'e the United States to set a date for withdrawing all military forces from Indochina.
WASHINGTON, May 14 —Administration officials said today that Soviet and other vessels in Haiphong harbor were “completing their unloading”—apparently without molestation by United States aircraft or warships in the area.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 14—The lower house of the National Assembly approved a bill this evening granting President Nguyen Van Thieu the right to rule by decree, subject to approval of each decree by the Assembly.
LONDON—The moral basis for the exercise of power in a democracy is a complicated business. Ambition and principle are so often confused. But the premise of allowing a man to hold power is at least that he remain conscious of its sources, its purpose and its limits.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 14—At 1:30 this afternoon antiaircraft guns were heard. ‘Seconds later the sirens sounded over Hanoi.
To the Editor: An ‘'allibd official” in Vietnam, after viewing from a helicopter the results of our recent B‐52 raids is quoted (news story May 6) as follows:
Few colonial renunciations in history have been wholly voluntary or altruistic, not even the celebrated American grant of independence to the Philippines, which owed much to the sugar lobby's interest in imposing tight quotas on Philippine shipments. Nevertheless, at this moment of bad conscience over Vietnam, Americans are entitled to take some pride in the enlightened self‐interest that has brought about the return of Okinawa to Japan.
WASHINGTON, May 14—The Congressional debate over endthe‐war legislation is turning into a dispute over whether an internationally supervised cease‐fire—such as proposed by President Nixon—should be made a condition for withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 13—She is a part of Vietnam's past, though probably not its future.
Glamour issues led the stock market higher yesterday as cautious optimism percolated in Wall Street amid the absence of any new Vietnam tensions.
Interest rates tended to move down in a slow trading session yesterday, but investors balked at purchasing new issues that offered returns lower than those that prevailed late last week. The credit markets seemed increasingly confident that the Administration's latest Vietnam moves would not lead to a confrontation with Communist powers. As a result bidding was aggressive for the moderate amount of fresh financing sought. The shooting of George C. Wallace, Alabama's Governor and a Presidential candidate, came after much of the market had closed, Little impact on prices of fixedincome securities was reported in late transactions.
FIRE, BASE AND.0, South Vietnam, May 15‐7‐Allied officers at this artillery base eight miles west of Hue pointed this afternoon to a ragged strip of churned orange clay, six miles to the south where artillery shells were exploding.
MANILA, May 15—A large group of Government and legislative officials who met with President Ferdinand E. Marcos at the Presidential Palace today supported the use of American bases in the Philippines to supply allied operations in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 15 (AP) The Pentagon disclosed today that a seventh aircraft carrier and at least six warships of the destroyer type were being sent to Vietnam in a continuation of the heavy naval build‐up in the Gulf of Tonkin. The Ticonderoga, an antisubmarine carrier, is scheduled to sail from San Diego soon, possibly tomorrow, officials said.
WASHINGTON, May 15 (UPI) —The Republican National Committee has assailed United Press International and the National Broadcasting Company for transmitting photos and films supplied by North Vietnam without considering first whbther they were in the “national interest.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 16 — South Vietnamese troops, led by a platoon of 30 soldiers flown in by helicopters, reoccupied Fire Base Bastogne yesterday on the southwesterly approaches to Hue.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 15—The United States tufned otrer its huge Camranh Bay air base to the South Vietnamese today.
The Congressional showdown on the President's war policy, which may come today in the Senate, involves far more than the immediate issue of Mr. Nixon's continuation and escalation of American involvement in the Indochina conflict. Underlying the proposals to invoke Congress power of the purse to end United States participation in the war promptly, conditional only on the release of American war prisoners, is a fundamental constitutional prerogative—the essential responsibility of Congress to decide whether to commit the armed forces of this country to a foreign war.
The American Stock Exchange continued its upward progress yesterday, adding 0.12 to clime at 27.60 yesterday, as measured by the index. This was well above the slump level last week following President Nixon's announcement of firmer Vietnam policy when the index dropped to 26.88.
By mining Haiphong and extending air attacks in the North, President Nixon is giving the proper answer to Russia's challenge in Vietnam. North Vietnam's latest invasion of the South with her entire regular army is the clearest conceivable case of flagrant aggression. It could not have been executed, or even conceived in the blitzkrieg form entirely new to the Indochina struggle, without massive Russian aid in weapons, training and planning. Its aim was to stir up again a horrible war, to halt the remarkable progress of Mr. Nixon's policy of peace and withdrawal, to humiliate America and discredit her as an ally throughout the world and to establish Russia on China's doorstep as the dominant power in Indochina.
Although preparations for the Nixon‐Brezhnev meeting in Moscow are still going forward, there remains no certainty that it will take place. In 1960, both President Eisenhower and Premier Khrushchev journeyed to Paris in the wake of the U‐2 incident for a previously scheduled four‐power summit, but the conference never met. Mr. Khrushchev, backing out at the last moment, preferred to use the opportunity for a propaganda blast at the United States, undoubtedly to appease hardliners in the Soviet hierarchy at home.
MOSCOW, May 15—The Soviet Union today gave its most positive public signal that it expects to receive President Nixon: next Monday despite tensions,. over, the mining of North Vietnamese ports.
LONDON, May 15 — The British Government mounted a strong defense of President Nixon's Vietnam policies today in a spirited, three‐hour debate in the House of Commons.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., May 15 — Secretary General Waldheim today sharply increased his pressure, to have the Vietnam issue brought before the United Nations by making public a strongly worded letter he wrote last week to the President of the Security Council.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 15 (UPI)—The manager of the American Legion Club here has been arrested on charges of possession of illegal weapons and currency and importing violations and jailed without bail, the legion commander here said today.
Scattered antiwar protests in college towns and elsewhere Yesterday brought group arrests in Princeton, N.J., and Lebanon and Portsmouth, N.H., and a 15‐minute sit‐in on the West Side Highway here during rush‐hour traffic.
WASHINGTON, May 15—Senator Frank E. Moss, who supports the Federal Trade Commission's controversial proposal that the television airwaves be open to counteradvertising, today accused the White House of attempting to redefine the First Amendment by opposing the proposal.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 16 (UPI)—Vice President Agnew, who is in Tokyo, will make a quick trip to Saigon on Wednesday for discussions with Vietnamese and American leaders on the war situation, Government sources said today.
WASHINGTON, May 15—The Pentagon discloged today that the mined waterways in North, Vietnam included rivers and canals.
WASHINGTON, May 15—Secretary of State William P. Rogers, his voice rising in anger, today defended the mining of North Vietnam's harbors and said that if the Johnson Administration had taken the step earlier, the war might have ended long ago.
PARIS, May 15—A group of Americans in France protested today the appointment of Brig. Gen. John W. Donaldson as defense attaché at the United States Embassy in Paris.
WASHINGTON, May 16 (Reuters)—The commander of the United States Seventh Air Force in Vietnam was relieved of his post “because of irregularities in the conduct of his command responsibilities,” it was announced here today.
WASHINGTON, May 16 With the sounds of antiwar and religious songs echoing through the Rotunda, about 120 persons were arrested here today when they refused to end a sit‐in in the Capitol.
WASHINGTON. May 16 —Two Soviet flotillas comprising eight naval vessels have joined forces 200 miles east of the Vietnamese coast Administration officials disclosed today.
SAIGON; South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 17—The United States command said yesterday that air strikes over the last five days had cut North Vietnam's main fuel pipeline to the South by destroying all its pumping stations in the southern panhandle.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 17 (Reuters) —Vice President Agnew anrived in Saigon today for brief talks with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam and American commanders.
As the military debacle accelerates in Vietnam, desperate elements among the top military brass intensify their efforts to convince Americans that the war could have been “won” were it not for the “defeatist” influences of an assortment of “unpatriotic” activists. This is the Pentagon's equivalent of the “stab‐in‐the‐back” myth so artfully manipulated by the German General Staff to the ultimate advantage of German fascism.
PARIS, May 16—The Vietnamese Communists proposed today that the Paris peace conference resume on Thursday. The United States promptly refused to attend.
WASHINGTON, May 16 (UPI)—The Defense Department today identified a serviceman from. New York state who died in Vietnam last week as a result of hostile action. He was Harold J. Faldemeyer, an Army captain from Stony Point.
DENVER, May 16—C. WilHard Heckel, a professor and former dean of the Rutgers University Law School was elected today to be Moderator of the 184th General Assembly of the United Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.
SAIGON, May 16 (AP)—The United States command, in its summary of the results of a week of air strikes, said Air Force F‐4 jets had attacked No'th Vietnam's main air defense complex at Bachmal airfield three miles south of Hanol “destroying several structures.”
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 16—Allied officers feel increasingly confident that it is possible that the city of Kontum in the Central Highlands can be held against an expected assault by the North Vietnamese Army.
WASHINGTON, May 16—Representative Leslie Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, read into the Congressional Record today what he said was the last of his four interviews with former United Service Organizations employes, which purported to detail fraud and other abuses by U. S. 0. personnel in South Vietnam.
Saigon, South Vietnam, May 16 (UPI)—The Hanoi radio said United States planes had planted more mines at Haiphong and several other harbors yesterday, possibly to replace those that had drifted out to sea since they were planted last week.
Gov. George C. Wallace of Alabama won the Michigan primary yesterday largely because of his opposition to busing, welfare and taxes and not because of a sudden sympathy vote after the attempt on his life Monday.
No one is heartened by the situation in Indochina, least of all the President.
In the name of the employes of the Veterans Administration's New York Regional Office, most of them veterans themselves and some Vietnam veterans, I take exception to the April 9 news story in The Times, where a veteran was quoted as saying V.A. employes are “cold” toward new Vietnam veterans struggling their way back to civilian life.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 16—North Vietnamese officials are telling diplomats and journalists that they expect heavier American bombing and other attacks before long and are prepared, to meet them.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 16—A representative of the Communists Provisional Revolutionary Government for South Vietnam claimed great military success for his side today but insisted that it did not seek complete political control.
WASHINGTON, May 16—The Senate accepted today, by a vote of 47 to 43, an Administration proposal that withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam be conditioned upon an internationally supervised cease‐fire.
DUCPHO, South Vietnam, May 13—Every member of the South Vietnamese Marines, when he enlists, must send letter to his family saying that he accepts the probability of his death and that they must accept it, too.
MOSCOW, May 16 — The Soviet Union opened a publicity campaign today to justify its scheduled talks with President Nixon next week against the background of the mining of North Vietnamese ports.
WESTOVER, Mass., May 16 (UPI)—Ninety‐five antiwar protesters, most of them students from nearby colleges, were arrested today on charges of disturbing the peace while blocking two gates at Westover Air Force base.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 17 — Vice President Agnew spent three hours in Saigon today and conferred with President Nguyen Van Thieu and American officials here.
WASHINGTON, May 17 —Administration officials said categorically today that no ships had entered or left Haiphong harbor since President Nixon ordered it mined. They also said that reconnaissance showed no minesweeping activity at Haiphong or other North Vietnamese ports.
MOSCOW, May 17—With the visit of President Nixon only five clays off, the Soviet media are conveying the impression that the American mining of Haiphong have fostered new collaboration between the Soviet Union and China.
WASHINGTON, May 17,(Reuters)—‐The United States is considering recommissioning the 58,000‐ton battleship New Jersey and sending it to Indochina to take part in the United States action off Vietnam, the Defense Department indicated tonight.
To head a newly created Government watchdog committee to prevent bureaucrats from overzealously using, secrecy stamps, President Nixon named John S. D. Eisenhower.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 17 — All of South Vietnam's institutions of higher learning closed today in ac cordance with President Nguy en Van Thieu's emergency mobilization decree, and students of both sexes prepared for military or paramilitary training.
SAN DIEGO, May 17 (AP)—The aircraft carrier Ticonderoga sailed, for Vietnam today with a new commanding officer, Capt. Frank T. Hemler. At least three crewmen were missing, having taken sanctuary in Quaker church.
The discussion in your May 10 editorial “Mr. Nixon's Brinkmanship” and on the Op‐Ed page the same day of the President's Vietnam policy shift makes interesting and somewhat painful reading.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, May 18— South Vietnamese troops transported by helicopter moved yester: clay within two miles of the besieged and battered city Anloc, senior American officials here said. The advance, by paratroopers and units of the South Vietnamese 21st Division, was said to have met only sporadic opposition.
WASHINGTON, May 17 — Every time some high‐standing politician utters that line about our not even wanting anything in return for all the fighting we have done in Vietnam and all the money we have spent out there, somebody ought to stand up in the audience and cry, “Why not?”
PARIS, May 17 — Premier Pharr Van Dong of North Vietnam said in an interview published today that his side would negotiate an end to the war in 24 hours, if it could.
HAIPHONG, North Vietnam, May 17—The North Vietnamese say they are clearing American mines from the Haiphong harbor as planes drop them, and moving ships in and out.
MEXICO CITY, May 17 (Reuters)—About 10,000 Vietnam war protesters chanting “Nixon assassin” marched past the United States Embassy today.
A recovery in the last halfhour enabled the stock market to finish mixed yesterday in lackluster trading as many investors continued to remain on the sidelines, mainly because of the unsettled Vietnam situation.
LITTLE ROCK, Ark., May 18 —Senator John L. McClellan at the age of 76 is in the toughest re‐election fight of his 35‐year Congressional career.
WASHINGTON, May 18 (AP) —The White House denied today a New York Times report that the North Vietnamese were clearing United States mines from Haiphong and that ships were entering and leaving the port.
WASHINGTON, May 18 —While this Sunday's antiwar march is expected to be much like those before it here, the civil disobedience planned for Monday at the Pentagon will probably be more like the 1967 march on the Defense Department headquarters than last year's May Day.
Satan: Giap began [the offensive in South Vietnam] too late. He did not move quickly enough. May 15 is the beginning of the monsoon season. And, if he does not win by then, it will be put off till later.
To the Editor: James Reston, in a burst of morality(column May 12), calls the Russian diplomatic note on the new Vietnam crisis “a masterpiece of hypocrisy.”
SAIGON, Friday, May 19 (AP) —The Hanoi radio said that large numbers of United States aircraft attacked North Vietnam yesterday.
ALEXANDRIA, Va., May 18 —Mrs. Helen Batcheller Lansdale, the wife of Maj: Gen. Edward G. Lansdale, U.S.A.F., retired, the counter‐insurgency expert of the war in Vietnam, died on Sunday at her home here. She was 71 years old. In addition to her husband, she leaves two sons, Peter C. and Edward R.
After the French pulled out of Indochina, it seemed a legitimate concern of the United States that Communism not be allowed to take Vietnam by default. There was ample and convincing ideological momentum to impel Washington to forestall any real or imagined thrust by Peking to assert hegemony over Southeast Asia.
Confidence in President Nixon's handling of Vietnam has sagged notably in recent weeks among those who voted in Michigan's Democratic primary this week, according to a New York Times survey.
HOUSTON, May 18 — The “weight of power” is in the hands of the Middle East oilproducing countries in their efforts to join the international oil companies in the operation of concessions, J. K. Jamieson, chairman of the board of the Standard Oil Company (New Jersey), reported to shareholders today at their annual meeting.
WASHINGTON, Friday, May 19—An explosion occurred early today in a section of the Pentagon, Government officials said. There was no explanation, nor a report of damages.
WASHINGTON, May 18 Former Defense Secretary Clark M. Clifford charged today that President Nixon's military actions against North Vietnam were prolonging the war and raising the risk of a major confrontation with the Soviet Union.
The 23d annual Armed Forces Day Parade, which had been scheduled to start Saturday at 2:30 P.M. on upper Fifth Avenue, was canceled yesterday because of the possibility of violence.
WASHINGTON, May 18 (UPI)—Pentagon officials discounted the idea today that the Navy might put one of its mothballed battleships back into action off Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 17—For over a quarter of a century the United States and the Soviet Union have been concentrating on the issues that divided them—Berlin, the Middle East, Korea, Vietnam, Cuba and the organization of Western Europe—but now, after many savage differences and pointless miseries, their leaders are getting together in Moscow to talk about limited but important areas of cooperation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, May 19—North Vietnamese troops, supported by tanks, made another series of attacks on Government positions only a mile and a half northwest of Kontum in the Central Highlands early today, but they were beaten back by a combination of American air strikes and resistance on the ground, according to allied reports.
HANOI, North ietnani, May 18—Route 5, the road; linking Hanoi and Haiphong, was cut in the middle on May 11 by the bombing of a bridge at Haiduong Drivers now have to make a detour that involves two river crossings.
WASHINGTON, May 18 Jerry W. Friedheim, the Pentagon spokesman, said today that Russian diplomats in various cities had been apparently boasting of a continued flow of material to Noith Vietnam, “and we have nothing flew to say about it.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 18 — Despite four years of Vietnamization, American and South Vietnamese military commanders here have relied less on the Government's ground troops to stem the current North Vietnamese offensive than on an instrument of massive bombing that only the Americans have — the B‐52.
WASHINGTON, May 19—Federal investigators searched for clues today in the rubble of a Pentagon rest room that was destroyed by an explosion early this morning, touching off tightened security procedures across Washington.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, May 20—South Vietnmese troops fought a series of clashes along a 15‐mile stretch of road yesterday in a fresh atempt to break a month‐long impasse, and relieve the besieged provincial capital of Anloc.
To the Editor: Four weeks ago when North Vietnam invaded South Vietnam it clearly dispelled any, doubts as to whether the conflict is a civil war or not. The action of the Communists has proved once and for all that it is not a civil war but a cold‐blooded attempt by a Communist country to forcibly take over a free one.
WASHINGTON, May 19—Qualified diplomatic sources said today that the Chinese Government had agreed to allow the Pevek, a Soviet freighter damaged during a United States bombing attack on Haiphong on April 16, to put in at Canton for repairs.
WASHINGTON, May 19 —President Nixon said tonight that the main goal of his trip to the Soviet Union was to establish “a different relationship” between the two great powers so that they “work together rather than against each other.”
KONTUM, South Vietnam, May 19—The shelling began at about 1 A.M. today and from 2 to 7 o'clock North Vietnamese ground forces tried to breach the lines of the South Vietnamese 23d Division.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 19 (AP)— David DeVoss, a correspondent for Time‐Life, was wounded today during North Vietnamese shelling of the Government relief force trying to reach the belaguered provincial capital of Anloc.
ITHACA, N. Y., May 19 —Seventeen antiwar demonstrators were found guilty of civil contempt here today for their role in the five‐day antiwar occupation of Cornell's Carpenter Hall last month., They were fined $250 each.
HANOI, May 19—Writing from North Vietnam is a strange experience. A reporter seldom goes to a country with which his own is actively at war. But it is not only the emotions that are confusing. There is the problem of facts.
The bomb explosion at the Pentagon represents a return to the mindless display of violence as a means of registering dissent from the violence of war. The ultraradicals who boast of responsibility for this pointless act stand totally discredited by the overwhelming mass of the student generation whom they once hoped to enlist in their anarchist ranks.
A newspaper's reason for being is to inform. The effective discharge of that function is always most difficult—and also most important—in time of war because both sides use news as a weapon and because censorship severely restricts access to combat information.
To the Editor: A recent Times editorial condemned efforts by students to close down universities in protest over the escalation of the war in Indochina as counterproductive and violative of the rights of other members of the academic community.
WASHINGTON, May 19—Senator James L. Buckley of New York, who unseated a Republican Senator in the 1970 election, received more than $15,000 last year for making Speeches, six of them at Republican fund‐raising gatherings across the country. Mr. Buckley, a Conservalive — Republican and member of the Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee, has been in demand on the Republican dinner‐speaking circuit since he defeated Senator Charles E. Goodell a liberal Republican.
PEKING, May 19 (Renters)—Chinese and Soviet officials held a series of planning sessions with North Vietnamese and Mongolian representatives here today in efforts to defeat the American blockade of North Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 19—There is an air of grotesque unreality to life in Hanoi. A gardener clips the hedge of the old Tonkin imperial residence. One stands outside admiring the city's magnificent trees and watching the little birds. Then the antiaircraft guns start firing. No one could miss the fact that this city is at war. The shelters everywhere, the uniforms, the guns say all that. But there remains a strange tropical tranquility. A girl bicycles by balancing baskets of spinach at either end of a bamboo pole. Walking down the street at night, one hears records of “Swan Lake” from a window of what turns out to be the home of Hanoi's mayor.
WASHINGTON, May 19 —Kenneth W. Clawson, the White House aide who accused The New York Times last night of serving “in a least two specific instances” as a “conduit of enemy propaganda,” reaffirmed his views today and said they reflected the attitude of the White House.
BUFFALO, May 19 — Five peace activists convicted of attempting to destroy draft board records in a Federal building here were placed on a year's probation today by the United States District Court Judge John T. Curtin, who called the Vietnam war. “a horror” and told the defendants that their love of country probably was greater than that of most people.
Cardinal Cooke called yesterday for a “speedy end” to the war in Vietnam and, while praising American motives, said that “all wars are to be deplored.”
ABOARD U.S.S. CONSTELLATION, in the Gulf of Tonkin, May 17—Thomas R. Wilkinson's A‐7 Corsair jet was hit by antiaircraft fire on a bombing mission over North Vietnam today, but the Navy pilot managed to make it out to sea. He parachuted and was later plucked from the Gulf of Tonkin by a rescue helicopter as shells from enemy shore batteries pocked the water around him.
HANOI — When Henry Kissinger briefed the White House press May about the decision to mine North Vietnamese ports, he ended by saying that he still hoped for a negotiated settlement. “Even in Vietnam,” he said, “there must be some realities that transcend the parochial concern of the contestants.”
CORPUS CHRISTI, Tex., May 20 (UPI) — George Bush, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, said today that President Nixon's mining of North Vietnamese ports was regarded by many United Nations diplomats as ‘'a reasonable response to an unreasonable enemy.”
Armed Forces Day was the occasion for a series of nationwide antiwar demonstrations yesterday, but the one that got the most attention involved an anonymous letter an explosion at sea, a string of red and black balloons and what the Coast Guard at Newport, R. I., called “pure coincidence.”
Military tacticians know that very young men make very good foot soldiers. Nations as different as China and Israel know that their national survival may depend on how well they persuade their chil dren to accept a romantic heroic view of death One wonders how many German children would have marched off to war if so much of German literature had not softened them up for it; or how many Japa nese youths would have volunteered for kamikaze raids if, their child hoods had not been so full of the folklore of heroism.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, May 19—The practical questions on the Nixon‐Brezhnev agenda—the control of strategic weapons, the expansion of trade, the Joint exploration of space, etc.—have all been settled or almost settled in advance, so there will be plenty of time to discuss the problems of ending the war in Vietnam and avoiding another Arab‐Israeli convulsion in the Middle East.
URBANA, Ill., May 20—About 200 Vietnam veterans, burdened by rising college costs and frustrated by delays in receiving G.I. Bill benefits, have urged Congress to begin an immediate effort to retrain, reeducate and rehabilitate veterans.
HONG KONG, May 20 (Reuters)—North Vietnam said the Hanoi area had been savagely attacked by American aircraft today.
WASHINGTON, May 20—President Nixon is scheduled to arrive in Moscow Monday with the prospects for a significant improvement in Soviet‐American relations more encouraging than at any time in recent years.
The National Black Political Agenda, which provoked a controversy when it was published, is a political action checklist and a historically significant document reflecting major concerns of black Americans in 1972.
TOKYO, May 20 (AP)—Three United States B‐52 bombers made emergency landings on Okinawa today because bad weather on their way back from missions in the Vietnam area prevented aerial refueling for the return flight to Guam. The landings touched off leftist protests on the island.
MANILA, May 20—Forty‐four people were injured when violence erupted again in the vicinity of the United States Embassy here this afternoon. Homemade bombs were exploded during a youth rally protesting “United States aggression in Vietnam,” and youths clashed with the police.
SAIGON—When the North Vietnamese began their big offensive seven weeks ago, the big question was: Is this the beginning of the end for South Vietnam?
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 20—Nhan Dhan, the leading Hanoi daily, warned in an artitle today against “signs of weakness” that would encourage American “truculence.”
KONTUM, South Vietnam, May 17—There was a mess sergeant at the American military compound here back in 1965 who took pride in bypassing such things as regulations on meal hours, and could always come up with a meal for a hungry correspondent. The sergeant also took pride in the condition of the compound, and especially the mess hall, and once, with the help of an elderly French nun—an expert scrounger—built a magnificent barbecue on the shaded veranda.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, May 20 (UPI)—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told members of the House of Representatives five weeks before the North Vietnamese began their offensive in South Vietnam that a nationwide Communist attack was not “a serious possibility.”
Let s get things straight from the offset Despite its title this book is not about China, the Chinese or the Chinese language. It is about Nicho las, a child who is different—exactly how different we are left to guess. It is also about his older sister, Amanda, and her desperate need to be accepted by a girl her own age.
PONT‐SAINTE‐MAXENCE, France—This coming week's Moscow summit differs in American eyes from that which preceded it in Peking. President Nixon's visit to the Chinese capital was regarded as a historic landmark. No such pretension is made about the journey to the U.S.S.R., which is seen as a major political event but not a watershed.
FORT DIX — From Vietnam jungles to army post to civilian life is a transition that Fort Dix seeks to ease through a job‐counseling program, to give the veteran a chance in a squeezed job market.
Blacks suffer so many disadvantages that one wonders when black fiction will begin to imitate black life and turn disadvantages into style. For what American fiction needs more than anything else is style. We are all tired of tedious, well‐tailored books that look too much alike. Our fiction industry needs what our clothing industry has, but black authors have not improvised enough original material to which the Pierre Cardins of the literary world can look for inspiration.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association, in cooperation with the Department of Defense, again will sponsor a goodwill tour of military bases in Vietnam and Korea this summer.
TOKYO, May 20 (UPI)—North Vietnam's official press agency said today that a Soviet seaman was killed when American planes bombed a Russian ship in a North Vietnamese port May 10.
THE queasiness that infiltrated Wall Street almost two months ago with the intensification of the Vietnam fighting finally subsided late last week as investors once again paid attention to the fundamental strengths in the nation's economy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, May 21—A heavy attack by North Vietnamese troops yesterday stalled the South Vietnamese column trying to relieve the ?? overnment forces at Anlo the provincial capital 60 miles north of Saigon that has been besieged and cut off by road for six weeks.
The subject of Vietnam will. of course, be very much on both Mr. Nixon's and Mr. Brezhnev's minds.
As President Nixon begins his meetings with the Soviet leaders today the most pressing problem of all will not be on the agenda, though it will inevitably affect the outcome of the negotiations and will rarely be out the minds of the participants. It is the problem of ending the death and destruction in Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 21—The Roman Catholic cathedral in. Hanoi was crowded with hundreds of worshipers for the first mass at 4:30 this morning and again for the second at 6 o'clock. The services are held at such early hours, North Vietnamese say, to avoid American bombing.
MOSCOW, May 21—The Soviet leadership announced today the demotion of a member of the ruling Politburo who is known as an opponent of the Kremlin's policy of accommodation with the Western powers.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 17 —Ung Tuong, the frail curator of the Hue Museum, spoke with urgency. He could not keep his right foot from tapping.
PHUCLOC, North Vietnam—At the southern boundary of the city of Haiphong the rice fields begin. The vista of watery green stretches out to the horizon, broken only by the occasional island of a tiny village.
SALZBURG, Austria, May 21 —Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser for national security, expressed confidence today that the enemy offensive in South Vietnam, and the Administration's responses to it, would not upset efforts to improve Soviet‐American relations.
WASHINGTON, May 21—As antiwar protesters rallied peacefully on the Capitol grounds, breakaway group of a few hundred youths battled the police today.
KONTUM, South Vietnam, May 21—North Vietnamese in‐, filtration forces twice occupied South Vietnamese trenches, just north of Kontum today.
PEKING, May 21 (Reuters)—Diplomatic sources said today that the Chinese were diverting trains to carry increased aid to North Vietnam in an effort to offset the effects of the American blockade of North Vietnamese ports.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 21—Highly placed American intelligence sources believe that the North Vietnamese offensive was not intended to be a decisive campaign for total military victory, but an effort to establish a better base for the political struggle in Vietnam and for the negotiations in Paris.
Mario M. Cuomo, the lawyer appointed by Mayor Lindsay to study the controversial low‐income housing project in Forest Hills, Queens, yesterday raised the possibility of setting aside perhaps 15 per cent of the apartments for Vietnam veterans and some for middleincome families.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, May 22—A North Vietnamese force of unreported size attacked South Vietnamese defensive positions on the Mychanh River about 18 miles northwest of Hue this morning. At last report, the attack was continuing.
MOSCOW. May 21—“Why do we help Nixon win his election?”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 23 — South Vietnamese forces, supported by waves of American fighterbombers, yesterday turned back for the second consecutive day a sizable enemy attack on their forward positions northwest of Hue.
WASHINGTON, May 22—The Defense Department denied today that the Soviet cargo ship Zeya had crossed the minefield in Haiphong Harbor.
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 22 (AP)—Enemy frogmen slipped in yesterday and blew a hole in an American munitions ship, the 7,643‐ton Jefferson City Victory, military informants reported today. The sources said one frogman was killed by guards. The damage to the ship, registered in New York and owned by Victory Carriers, Inc., was not given.
WASHINGTON, May 22 (UN) —A small group of protesters, shouting “Stop the air war,” briefly disrupted a session of the House today with a tape recording of an aircraft‐like noise.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 22—A Soviet stewardess who North Vietnamese sources say was badly wounded when her ship was bombed at Haiphong May 9 left on an Aeroflot commercial flight for Moscow today.
MOSCOW, May 22— President Nixon was given a correct dose of pomp today and was put. up in the imperial quarters of the Kremlin.
WASHINGTON, May 22 (UPI) —The National Student Association said today that a delegation of four persons from the association flew to Hanoi during the weekend at the invitation of the North Vietnamese Government. The association said that the delegation was composed of Margery Tabankin, association president; the Rev. Bob Leacky, editor of the magazine American Report; Bill Zimmerman of the Medical Aid Committee for Indochina, and the Rev. Paul Mayer of the Harrisburg Defense Committee.
To the Editor: President Nixon's newest peace offer to North Vietnam is as generous as possible, short of U.S. surrender and the delivery of South Vietnam to the Communists. It is disturbing then to read only of the President's escalatory actions—the “stick” of his address—and very little of the large “carrot” settlement offer the President made. If nothing else, the President's new offer will at least put to rest forever the doves’ contention that just a bit more U.S. compromise will win the peace. President Nixon has gone the limit; it is Hanoi that refuses to allow the war to end.
WASHINGTON, May 22 (AP) —A White House official said today that North Vietnam was showing serious strains in its home‐front morale and political structure as well as on the battlefield because of United States military actions.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 22— The consensus of foreign observers here now is that American mining has effectively closed North Vietnam's ports.

The Nixon Administration early proclaimed that the world was emerging from the “era of confrontation” and entering upon an “era of negotiations.” Underlying this thought was the concept that the United States would maneuver adeptly among the major states to establish and maintain balance of power offering more safety than the former bipolar nuclear “terror.”
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., May 22—Cardinal Cooke visited Secretary General Waldheim today and remarked later that the United Nations should intervene to end the Vietnam war if the stalemate in the Paris talks continues. The Cardinal was returning a visit by Mr. Waldheim several weeks ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 22—The people of Saigon are exhausted with the war and with worrying over their men who are fighting it. They are frightened at the possibility that the battle may reach Saigon, where so many came first to escape the Communists and later the fighting.
PARIS, May 22 (UPI) —Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, head of the Vietcong delegation to the Paris peace talks, said today that President Nixon would not end the Vietnam war through any “maneuver” in Moscow.
SINGAPORE, May 22 (UPI)—. A Soviet cargo ship left Haiphong Harbor and sailed unmolested through the United States blockade of the port, according to the skipper and local shipping agents.
To the Editor: As a participant and observer of years of protest, including civil disobedience, I cannot help but question the efficacy of protest tactics used today. It seems as if all our work to educate public opinion about the Vietnam war is put to naught by a single broadcast of the President.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 22 (UPI)—The United States command withdrew 600 American servicemen from Vietnam last week, but 400 more Marine fliers entered the war zone, military spokesmen said today.
To the Editor:
PARIS, May 23—Le Due Tho, the North Vietnamese Politburo member who is directing his country's delegation to the peace talks here, said today that American.mines are being cleared from Haiphong harbor and that “our supplies will continue” to come In.
SAIGON, Wednesday, May 24 (AP)—The Hanoi radio said that eight United States planes were shot down over North Vietnam yesterday.
Mrs. Jane Briggs Hart wife of Senator Philip A. Hart, of Michigan, has told the Internal Revenue Service she has ceased paying her income taxes as a protest against the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 23—The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted today to cut the Administration's military aid program by $550‐million and to impose new restrictions on the executive branch's authority to make agreements on foreign military bases without the consent of Congress.
WASHINGTON, May 23—The Defense Department said today that more industrial sites in North Vietnam would be added to the target lists of American planes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 24—For four days American bombers have reportedly struck North Vietnam with great intensity and apparently unusual effectiveness.
PARIS, May 17—The Vietnamese expatriate community here, reacting to North Vietnam's initial successes in its current offensive, has begun to broaden contacts with the VietIcong delegation; apparently in the expectation that a coalition government will be formed in the future. ,
They are variously referred to as “smart bombs” or “guided bombs” or “hobos,” short for “homing bombs.”
DENVER, May 23—The General Assembly of the United Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. has called for an immediate halt to all military involvement in Indochina.
HONG KONG, May 23 (AP) —A North Vietnamese broadcast today attacked President Nixon's trip to Moscow as a “dark and despicable politicaldiplomatic attempt to undermine the solidarity of those who support the Vietnamese in their struggle against U.S. imperialist aggression.”
WASHINGTON, May 23 —The presidents of Princeton University and the University of Minnesota told the House Foreign Affairs Committee today that Congressional action to end the Vietnam war was becoming of critical importance in restoring the faith of a disillusioned generation of students in the American, system of government.
Members of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York voted 136 to 66 at their annual meeting last evening in favor of a resolution condemning “continued American involvement in the war in Indochina as the gravest current threat to the rule of law at home and abroad.”
PEKING, May 23—As President Nixon continues his talks with Soviet leaders in Moscow, there are growing indications here that China and the Soviet Union have embarked on an extensive if not entirely harmonious effort to thwart the President's effort to cut off supplies to North Vietnam.
SAIGON, Wednesday, May 24 (Reuters)—The United States command announced today that two American planes had been downed over North Vietnam in the last two days. One of them was shot down by North Vietnamese MIG, the command said.
WASHINGTON, May 23—The Defense Department said again today that there was no evidence that the minefields in North Vietnamese waters were being cleared. The statement was made by Jerry W. Friedheim, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs.
PARIS—Peking's “American option” is just as important to China's relations with Russia and to Chou En‐lai's political future as Washington's “Chinese option” is to U.S. relations with China and to President Nixon's reelection prospects.
CANTHO, South Vietnam, May 23—A fresh North Vietnamese division has invaded South Vietnam in the lower Mekong Delta, American officers in the region reported today. They said that the new division posed a grave threat to an area from which most regular Government troops had been withdrawn to aid in the fighting north of Saigon.
COLUMBUS, Ohio, May 23 —A 47‐year‐old suburban Boston sculptress and mother of five has paid out $15,000 of her own money to start a flood of stop‐the‐bombing mail rolling toward the White House from Middle America.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, May 25—American Air Force and Navy jet aircraft heavily attacked North Viet namese power plants and oil storage tanks in the Hanoi Haiphong area Tuesday and yesterday, the United States command reported.
WASHINGTON, May 24 (UPI) The State Department said that North Vietnam was seeking “political domination of South Vietnam” and dis missed assertions by Le Duc Tho, Hanoi's chief negotiator in Paris, that the other side sought a coalition Government in Saigon.
WASHINGTON, May 24—The Pentagon reported today that additional B‐52 bombers were being sent to Southeast Asia for use in the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, May 24 — Senator Edward M. Kennedy and the staff of his Senate sub committee on refugees esti mated today that the renewed fighting in South Vietnam had resulted in 40,000 to 50,000 civ ilian war casualties, including about 15,000 dead, by the first week in May.
A teacher's right to express political views that do not dis rupt school work was vigorous ly supported here yesterday by the United States Court of Ap peals for the Second Circuit.
The first two American fliers to shoot down five North Vietnamese MIG's are being treated here to two days on the town for what Navy spokesmen describe variously as “a little exposure and a little reward,” an infor mation tour and a move to get them home before their luck out.

A 22‐year‐old wounded Viet nam veteran who the police said had been AWOL from Fort Dix, N. J., for the last year, sur rendered to the City Fire Mar shal's office yesterday morning on an arson charge.
The local branches of 10 trade unions gave their support yesterday to former Represent ative Allard K. Lowenstein in his primary contest with Rep resentative John J. Rooney for the Democratic nomination in Brooklyn's 14th Congressional District.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 24—The. mood in Hanoi's small diplomatic community this week is strange: it is a little like being in the quiet of a storm, center.
WASHINGTON, May 24 — About 100 antiwar protesters, many of them prominent in the arts and sciences, were arrested today when they refused to leave the Capitol.
PARIS, Mya 24 (UPI)—The United States and South Viet nam today rejected a proposal by North Vietnam and the Vietcong to resume the peace talks here tomorrow.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 24—A leading member of North Vietnam's Communist party Politburo, Truong Chinh, was reported today to have said the war was “reaching the crucial stage.”
GENEVA. May 25—Windows of the building occupied by a Swiss sales subsidiary of Honeywell, Inc., the United States computer manufacturer, were smashed and anti‐American Vietnam war slogans were daubed on the wall in red paint here early today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 25 (AP)—Eight Americans were killed in action in Vietnam last week, seven were missing and 22 were wounded, the United States command announced today. This represented a decline from the week before, when 13 men were reported killed in action, 5 missing and 26 wounded.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 25 — There are more than 1,800 miles of dikes in North Vietnam. They are maintained and reinforced as they have been for centuries — by hand labor.
WASHINGTON, May 25—The Chinese Government has turned down a Soviet proposal to let 12 freighters carrying military equipment for North Vietnam enter Chinese ports to discharge their cargoes, according to diplomatic reports here.
The specter of “a billion Chinese on the mainland,” raised by former Secretary of State Dean Rusk five years ago in connection with the Vietnam war, has emerged again—but in a strikingly different context.
To the Editor: The half‐page advertisement “The People vs. The New York Times” violates the truth. The single quotation from The Times’ editorial of May 10 is itself malicious by its failure to quote in full, its failure to show that there was an omission, and by omitting the key phrase “... runs counter both to Congressional mandate....”

ELMIRA, N. Y., May 25 —Charles James, the Quaker teacher who was discharged two and a half years ago from Addison Central High School near ‘Elmira for wearing a black armband to class In protest against the war in Vietnam, today savored his vindication by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
BARCELONA, Spain, May 25 (UPI)—Pan American's office here was the target of a firebombing today in protest against the Vietnam war.
If the goal of coalition government still lies behind the conditions on which the Nixon Administration is prepared to make its exit from Vietnam, there can be no foreseeable exit. We have been pursuing this goal (whether from conviction or for public consumption one cannot say) for four years. As recently as Mr. Kissinger's last visit to Paris he carried with him, as he told the press, “a plan for coalition.” On what basis of reasonable expectation? Between erstwhile enemies in a civil conflict, the only form of coalition that can occur is that which results when a snake swallows a rabbit. One side or another must be eventually engorged.
WASHINGTON, May 25—The North Vietnamese should be getting the message by now. Their main ports are closed, by American mines. There are now, six U. S. aircraft carriers off their coast, bombing them night and day. The railroad lines from China to Hanoi are now under constant attack, and the weather and American air power have slovied down their offensive against Hue and Danang in the north, Kontum city in the central highlands, and Anloc, north of Saigon.
SAIGON, Friday, May 26—North Vietnamese tanks supported by infantry launched a frontal assault on Kontum city in the Central Highlands this morning after other enemy tanks and commandos had slipped into the city past Government defenders, American military sources said.
Vice President Agnew, here to accept a Father of the Year Award, lashed out yesterday at unnamed New York City “civic and government leaders” who expressed outrage in 1964 when neighbors ignored the screams of a young Queens woman who was being murdered, but who “now insist that we abandon South Vietnam.”
MOSCOW, May 25—President. Nixon met today for two hours of intensive talks with Soviet leaders to build a new framework for expanded trade between the United States and the Soviet Union.

To the Editor: Having just completed two semesters at a large Eastern university. vouch for the fact that it is simply not true that Weatherpeople policies are “totally discredited by the overwhelming mass of the student generation,” as you state in your May 20 editorial on the Pentagon bombing. It is the reluctance of movement people, rather, to hazard these young people's freedom or even lives which has so far made protest violence the exception. The candidates for such actions are there.
HUE South Vietnam May 26—Things are quiet for the moment in this city, which is still awaiting a North Vietnamese attack.
“This time we are not pulling our punches,” the commander of an American aircraft carrier in the Tonkin Gulf boasted the other day. “We've told the world we're going to be the winners.”
The newest form of student antiwar protest is the antiwar university. Rather than shutting the universities down and urging the students to stay home or organizing a few hundred students to take over one or two buildings, a growing number of student activists favor transforming the schools into organizing centers for the antiwar movement.
HANOI, North Vietnam, (Agence France‐Presse) — The Communist party daily, Nhan Dan, called today for “even greater” efforts to maintain security in North Vietnam.
CHICOPEE, Mass., May 26 (AP)—Two peace demonstrators were sentenced to 10 days in jail in Chicopee District Court today after failing to pay $10 fines for disturbing the peace. They were charged after an April 24 sitdown at Westover Air Force Base. The two are James H. Matlack, 34 years old, an assistant English professor at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and the Rev. Frank Dorman of Amherst.
ITHACA, N. Y., May 26—Some 3,350 Cornell students received degrees here today in a brief commencement ceremony marked by criticism by Dale R. Corson, university president, of the Vietnam war.
SAIGON South Vietnam Saturday, May 27—North Vietnamese soldiers hurled themselves against Government defenses in the Central Highlands city of Kontum and near the northern city of Hue through the day yesterday.
HANOI North Vietnam May 25—Nguyen Duy Trinh North Vietnam's Foreign Minister and Deputy Premier has suggested in an interview that the coalition government the Communists propose for South Vietnam should include some Vietnamese now living abroad.
To the Editor: Tom Wicker's May 9 column “An American Emperor” lights up a facet of our national life that demands the closest scrutiny with the least possible delay.
WASHINGTON, May 26—In an indication of a developing relationship between the Republican and Conservative parties in New York, Senator Jacob K. Javits has approved a $36,000‐a‐year job for founder of the Conservative party who ran against Mr. Javits in 1962. Mr. Javits, a liberal Republican from New York, acknowledged that he had given his clearance to President Nixon's nomination last Monday of Kieran O'Doherty, a former vice chairman of the Conservative party, to be member of the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 25—Boys and girls in their last year at Hanoi High School began taking their final examinations the other day—in villages miles from here.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 26—The pulse of 67 Winthrop Street, at times slow and steady, at times frenzied and spasmodic, emanates from Washington.
SAIGON South Vietnam May 26— Thousands of montagnard tribesmen, who had reportedly been kept in the beseiged city of Kontum by South Vietnamese official who wanted them to fight for the city, are now gradually being permitted to flee the danger zone.
ALBUQUERQUE, N. M., May 27—The Board of Regents of the University of New Mexico, at its monthly meeting this week, ruled that the university's faculty had acted outside its jurisdiction in calling for the impeachment of President Nixon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 27 (AP)—A cameraman for the Columbia Broadcasting System was wounded today in fighting at Mychanh on the northern front, C.B.S. News announced. Vinh ye, a veteran combat photographer, suffered shrapnel wounds on the right forearm when a North Vietnamese rocket‐grenade exploded near him. He was treated at a Hue hospital.
EAST BRIDGEWATER, Mass., May 27 (AP)—The inscription on the monument says, “Vietnam‐An American Tragedy. An apology for What We Did There. Memorial Day, 1972.”
PROBLEM for students of international law: Which of the following kinds of captives in Vietnam benefit from the rules of the Geneva Conventions?
WASHINGTON, May 27 —Senior Administration sources say that a Communist official attached to the North Vietnamese forces now fighting in South Vietnam has recommended to Hanoi within the last 48 hours a “political” settlement of the current fighting.
Hardly anybody challenges the belief that teachers are supposed to be personal models for their pupils. It is more difficult to get agreement on what constitutes the right model. Not too many years ago, riding a bicycle to school or smoking in public could mean dismissal.
HONG KONG, May 27—Chinese friendliness toward American businessmen who attended the Canton trade fair did not diminish by any noticeable degree after President Nixon announced the mining of North Vietnam's ports, according to a Los Angeles lawyer who visited China on behalf of 12 companies.
CLEVELAND, May 27—The right of The Plain Dealer to dismiss one of its reporters for publishing an article highly critical of the newspaper was upheld this week by an arbitrator.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 27—A recently introduced Soviet‐built missile that can be easily fired from the shoulder of a single soldier has made American pilots flying in South Vietnam apprehensive and has, hampered what is perhaps the most crucial of their air operations here—the observation missions by slow‐moving aircraft that spot enemy targets and call in bombing strikes by attack planes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 27 (Reuters)—An Italian freelance journalist, Ennio Iacobucci, has been ordered to leave South Vietnam on charges of illegally hoarding weapons, ammunition and documents, the official press agency said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, May 28—A South Vietnamese relief force has suffered a major defeat trying to evacuate wounded soldiers from the area just south of the besieged city of Anloc.
HANOI — Day after day last week North Vietnamese newspapers and radio ignored the Moscow summit meeting. It was one indication of how peculiar the situation seems in Hanoi.
LOS ANGELES, May 28—Senator Hubert H. Humphrey and Senator George McGovern, treating the California primary as if it was the Presidential election itself, repeatedly stung each other in cold anger in their first television confrontation today.
WASHINGTON—In the great turning‐point Battle of Midway that began just thirty years ago this week, the United States Navy fielded but three lonely carriers in its task force facing Japan's main fleet. The fliers who sank Tokyo's Imperial dreams thousand miles from Hawaii, and the American people, knew that the declared aim of the high‐riding enemy was the conquest of United States territory.
MOSCOW, May 28 — The initial reaction of a few ordinary Russians to President Nixon's televised address tonight was favorable, but some asked why he had not mentioned Vietnam in view of his emphasis on moves toward peace.
HANOI, North Vietnam, May 25—How strange comments that filter into this isolated place from the outside world often sound. This week the Voice of America told us that Vice President Agnew had declared the North Vietnamese Army “demoralized.” Then Maj. Gen. Alexander Haig Jr., Henry Kissinger's deputy, told correspondents that the political structure was under serious strain in Hanoi and prostitution was growing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, May 29—The war continued to produce casualties on both sides yesterday, but there was little change in the over‐all situation, with many opposing units dug into strong positions on South Vietnam's three most active fronts.
To the Editor: For the first time in its 52‐year history, the board of directors of the American Friends Service Committee called for a Quaker witness against the Indochina war in front of the White House—three years ago.
Despite the re‐escalation of the Vietnam war, Secretary of Defense Laird has reaffirmed that the draft call will not exceed 50,000 in 1972—half the number inducted last year and the lowest annual call since before the Korean war. He added that the Administration's goal still an all‐volunteer armed force by June 30, 1973.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 28—In Anloc, security is living burrowed deep under the earth where the North Vietnamese shells cannot get at you.
To the Editor: Whatever other effect they may have, your May 10 editorial “Mr. Nixon's Brinkmanship” plus Mr. Wicker's venomous attack will surely give comfort to the Communists and strengthen their will to continue on the offensive, hoping that America will cave In under such cries for appeasement.
SAIGON South Vietnam, May 29 (AP)—For the first time in 16 months there was no reduction in United States troop strength in Vietnam last week.
To the Editor: Is the same failing that undid the United States in Vietnam now cropping up in the antiwar movement?
CHICAGO, May 29 (AP)—The United Auto Workers president, Leonard Woodcock, said today] that an end of the war in Southeast Asia and the creation, of a full‐employment economy were top priorities in what he termed the U.A.W.'s “platform for progress.”
HUE, South Vietnam, May 9 —Two battalions of South Vietnamese rangers have been withdrawn from combat after suffering heavy losses In a battle with North Vietnamese tanks and infantry about 18 miles northwest of Hue.
MOSCOW, May 29—President Nixon and the Soviet Communist party leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev, concluded their historic week of summit talks today with a declaration of principles intended to mark a new, more stable and constructive era of Russian‐American relations despite continuing differences over such issues as Vietnam.
The Nixon‐Brezhnev summit in Moscow accomplished more than the pessimists expected, but less than the optimists had hoped for. On the positive side, it substantially improved the atmosphere of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. It also made historic beginning toward ending the nuclear weapons race. Unfortunately, the long meetings produced no movement toward ending the Vietnam war or easing the perilous stalemate in the Middle East. However, there is likely to be much more Soviet‐American cooperation in the future in areas of mutual interest—space and medical research, for example—even while political and economic competition continue in many areas.
To the Editor: On May 13, two extraordinary expressions of despair appeared on your Op‐Ed page. Anthony Lewis, writing from London about protest against the war in Vietnam and President Nixon's latest escalation, said that the “President is remote from human beings... He is impervious to facts.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 30—All three major fronts in the Vietnam ground war—north of Hue, at Kontum in the central highlands, and at Anloc 60 miles north of Saigon—were reported stable yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 29—Senior American intelligence officials said today that they had seen “very little evidence of any significant expansion in the movement of supplies through China to North Vietnam” since American planes sealed off seven North Vietnamese ports with mines and cut the rail lines beginning May 9.
PEKING, May 29 (Agence France‐Presse) — A usually well ‐informed diplomatic source said here today that three Polish ships bound for North Vietnam with freight had unloaded their special cargoes at a Chinese port instead, under an agreement between the Chinese and Polish Governments.
WASHINGTON, May 30 (AP —The Defense Department announced today that Timothy J. Monkelbaan of Lockport, N.Y., an Army Specialist 4, and David L. Wagner of Plattsburgh, N.Y., an Air Force technical sergeant, had been killed in action in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 30—The South Vietnamese Government tonight extended cautious approval of President Nixon's negotiations in the Soviet Union, but stated it would not accept “conditions contrary to the interests of the people of South Vietnam.”
LOS ANGELES. May 30—Senator Hubert H. Humphrey apologized tonight for a remark that had been interpreted as his having called Senator George McGovern a fool. Then their second television con frontation turned into a cool debate of issues, not with each other, but with their panel of questioners.
To the Editor:
PARIS, May 30—The North Vietnamese and Vietcong demanded today that the Paris peace talks resume on Thursday. It was the third such call since the United States and South Vietnam suspended the talks on May 4.
HONG KONG, May 30 (AP) —Shipping sources in Hong Kong reported today that two East German freighters loaded with supplies for North Vietnam had left for the Chinese port of Whampoa. apparently to unload their cargo, including heavy trucks, for possible rail movement to North Vietnam.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, July 1 — More South Vietnamese troops were lifted by helicopter into Communist occupied Quangtri Province yesterday as the drive to retake the northernmost part of the country went through its third day.
WASHINGTON, June 30— “Sometimes I wonder whether any of it is worth it,” Repre sentative Otis G. Pike Demo crat of Suffolk County, told the House this week as he began what turned out to be an unsuccessful effort to cut some items pending on the floor from the $21.3‐billion bill for military weap ons and re search. Despite the $21.3‐bil lion involved, Mr. Pike went on, “you look around the room and essen tially we are talking to our selves.”
WASHINGTON, June 30— President Nixon inadvertently stirred a controversy last night by telling his televised news conference that, when France “got out of Vietnam” in 1954, “15,000 French were never ac counted for after that.”
WASHINGTON, June 30— United States military planners are preparing a stepped up bombing effort in an attempt to shut off what they say is the last remaining trickle of mili tary supplies moving into North Vietnam from China.
HANOI, North Vietnam, June 30—The dike at Phuly, a town about 40 miles from Hanoi, has been seriously damaged.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 30 — President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam said today that his Government had agreed to return to the Paris peace talks because there was “a sign that the Communist side wants to negotiate seriously.”
To the Editor:
PARIS, June 30—Both Com munist delegations today indi cated their readiness to return to the Vietnam peace confer ence, whose resumption on July 13 was announced by President Nixon at his news conference last night.
WASHINGTON, June 30—A Pentagon spokesman said to day in response to questions about the reported bombing of the Phuly dike that the De fens Department “will stand on the statements that we have made in the past and that were made yesterday by the Presi dent.”
SALT LAKE CITY, June 30 (UPI) —Richard F. McCoy Jr., a Vietnam war hero and for mer Sunday School teacher, was found guilty by a Federal court jury late yesterday of air piracy involving $500,000 in ransom.
WASHINGTON— If there is a cardi nal principle among what we loosely call the laws of war, it is that one antagonist does not have the right to wreak Carthaginian peace upon the other. In Other words, to try to force the enemy to give in by methodically devastating his land, his crops, his people is now regarded as barbaric and deserving of punishment.
TOKYO, June 30 (UPI)— The Sony Corporation protested today that its products were being used in the Vietnam war without its knowledge.
Vice President Agnew charged here last night that Senator George McGovern was “one of the greatest frauds ever to be considered a Presidential can didate by a major American party.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 30 — Pfc, Larry O. Ver ocker of Streator, Ill., one of the dwindling number of American infantrymen in South Vietnam, volunteered to come here “to see what it was like.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, July 2 (AP)—The South Vietnamese counteroffensive on the northern front was slowed yesterday by enemy shelling and bad weather, according to reports from the field.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON — President Nixon moved energetically in both private and public settings last week to deal with two persistent problems—prob lems that, if left unattended, could provide his Democratic opponent next fall with major political opportunities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 1 (AP)—Maj. Gen. Alexander M. Haig, President Nixon's chief military aide, arrived in Saigon today for talks with top allied officials, the United States command reported.
WASHINGTON — Last February, President Nixon journeyed to China. The beginning of a reconciliation with China was long overdue, and both nations had an interest in discussing peace in Asia. But sortie weeks after President Nixon's return, Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird announced to the Congress that the escalation of the Vietnam war would cost us up to $5 billion more than anticipated.
The Platform Committee of the Democratic party last week produced a document which, although subject to revision at the convention in Miami Beach, indicates the basic principles on which the Democratic nominee will make his bid for the Presidency.
SAIGON— Almost as if the North Vietnamese offensive had never hap pened, President Nixon last week an nounced another troop withdrawal— 10,000 men over the next two months, to bring the total number of American forces in Vietnam to 39,000 by Sept. 1.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 1 (AP)—A time bomb in a suitcase destroyed a Cathay Pacific Airways jetliner over South Vietnam on June 15, re liable sources said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 1—The South Vietnam ese Government announced today that 42 sentences had been meted out since June 22 against Vietnamese news papermen, including heavy fines and prison terms up to one month.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 30—Gen. Creighton W. Abrams slipped quietly out of Saigon this week after his fifth year of duty in Vietnam. There were no farewell parties, no public change‐of‐command cere monies. His departure was marked only by the presenta tion of a medal, under strict security, by President Nguyen Van Thieu in the Presidential Palace.
To the Editor:
When the Supreme Court upheld the right of owners of largo suburban shopping centers to bar political pam phleteers from their premises last month, it may also have given the owners the right to decide which political can didates they would allow on the premises, according to shopping center owners.
THE Rise of George McGovern is sure to be recorded in political history as one of the great triumphs of propaganda and myth making.
SAIGON, South, Vietnam, Monday, July 3 (Reuters)— North Vietnamese troops shelled the city of Hue for four hours yesterday, killing or wounding about 50 persons, military sources said.
WASHINGTON, July 2—The United States has been secretly seeding clouds over North Vi etnam, Laos and South Viet nam to increase and control the rainfall for military purposes.
SAIGON, July 2 (AP)—The United States command an nounced today the loss of three more United States Air Force F‐4 Phantom jets over North Vietnam, with all six crewmen missing.
LONDON, July 2—The reconnais— sance techniques developed by the United States in Vietnam are especially remarkable in their selective capacity. They can count the number of furnaces in a steel mill hit by American planes, but they do not see bombed hospitals or schools or houses.
To the Editor:
A South Vietnamese student, apparently an antiwar dissi dent whose scholarship in the United States was canceled re cently, was shot and killed at Tansonnhut Airport in Saigon yesterday after he attempted to divert a Pan American jum bo‐jet flight to Hanoi.
After years of rainmaking experimentation, scientists are still not sure they under stand the short‐term effects of cloud‐seeding, much less the possible long‐term impact on the ecology of a region or the world.
WASHINGTON, July 2 — Senator George McGovern in dicated today that he would work to end party factional ism in the week before the Democratic National Conven tion.
Over the past decade a new term, geophysical war fare, has begun creeping into discussions of future types of military capability. A rough definition of the concept would be an act or acts of environmental engineering designed to change the flow of air and water in order to damage one side in a conflict and benefit the other.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, July 4—With strong Saigon forces fighting their way into Communist‐occupied Quangtri Province, North Viet namese forces farther south re plied yesterday with heavy ar tillery barrages. For the first time, the city of Hue came un der fire from long‐range 130‐ mm. guns.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, July 3—Dip lomatic and intelligence reports have persuaded some key Ad ministration officials that China will probably send engineer ba tallions to northern parts of North Vietnam to aid in the reconstruction of bombed‐out railroad links to China.
BUFFALO, July 3—Six priests of the Roman Catholic diocese of Buffalo have been suspended from their duties by Bishop James A. McNulty.
WASHINGTON, July 3—Two former high‐ranking officials of the Johnson Administration said today that Robert S. McNamara, while Secretary of Defense, specifically ordered the Air Force to stop all rainmaking late in 1967, well before its first use in North Nietnam.
Man in the News
A South Vietnamese student identified as the man who was killed sin Saigon Sunday while attempting to hijack a Pan American jet to Hanoi ap parently wrote an open letter to President Nixon on the day he boarded the plane.
With an exchange of quiet hellos on a dusty road in a refugee camp in South Viet nam, a search suffused with travail and romance came to an end after taking 24‐year‐ old Steve Menta halfway around the world from his home in Jackson Heights, Queens. Mr. Menta, a former marine, returned last week to Vietnam to search for the young woman he knew as Leenie, 21‐year‐old Thai Thi Thiet. Mr. Menta, who met Miss Thiet a year ago when stationed in her home town of Camlo, lost track of her after his return home when the town was overrun by Communist troops.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 3 (UPI)—The big Ameri can‐owned construction com bine known as RMK‐BRJ ended its operations in Vietnam to day after 10 years in which it built $1.9‐billion worth of mili tary installations and public works under Government con tract.
WASHINGTON, July 4—The surprise agreement by South Korea and North Korea to un dertake unification talks has produced an enthusiastic initial response in the Nixon Admin istration. Some senior officials even speculated today that the latest development might bring pressure on Hanoi to negotiate an end to the Vietnam war.
PHUDUONG, South Vietnam, June 29—They had lived for nearly two months under North Vietnamese occupation, but, they say, it was the constant pounding by American bombs and shells, not Communist rule, that finally drove them to desperation and to escape.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 4—A feeling is growing within South Vietnam's small educated élite that national morale has so collapsed that only a total revolution in the whole social structure offers hope of redemption.
TOKYO, Wednesday, July 5 (UPI) — North Vietnamese armed forces shot down two United States planes that raided many places inside Hanoi and Ninhbinh province at noon yes terday, the North Vietnamese press agency reported today. The downings brought the num ber of American planes shot in North Vietnam so far to 3,717, the agency said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, July 5—Fourteen of Saigon's daily newspapers, including both English‐lan guage dailies, were confis cated by the Government last night, and the Interior Min istry announced today that they would be prosecuted for violation of the press laws.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, July 5—South Viet namese paratroops and marines were reported to have moved into Quangtri city yesterday as Government forces continued their drive to retake the north ernmost province, which fell to the Communists in May.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 4 (Agence France‐Presse) — Nguyen Huu Tho, president of the South Vietnamese National Liberation Front, said today that the Vietnam war could have ended if President Nixon had responded seriously to its seven‐point peace plan aimed at creating an “independent and neutral South Vietnam.”
WASHINGTON, July 4 (UPI) —Former Senator Eugene J. McCarthy criticized today the proposed Democratic platform for not advocating the legaliza tion of marijuana and imme diate amnesty for draft evaders. He also said that the platform should call for a political settle ment of the Vietnam war that would include “negotiation of a new Government in South Viet nam.”
To the Editor:
MIAMI BEACH, July 4 (AP) —Youthful protesters conduct ed a mock funeral today for a slain Vietnamese hijacker. They left quietly after the police had refused to let them place a piece of plywood strewn with hibiscus flowers in a canal as part of the funeral for Nguyen Thai Binh. He was slain in Sai gon Sunday while trying to hi jack an American jetliner.
ROSEVILLE, Mich.—John Dos Passos ushered in the New Deal years with an essay entitled “The Doughboy Thir teen Years Later.” He chronicled the Bonus March, and spoke of Our Boys gone bitter and disillusioned with the nation they had served in combat; of a shabby, desperate mob besieging Washington, D. C., in demand of a “bonus” for the hardship they had endured while the rest of the nation was waving flags.
WASHINGTON, July 5—The Pentagon today denied claims by North Vietnam that it has been moving supplies into 12 unnamed coastal points not covered by American mines, warships or planes.
NEW DELHI, July 5—John B. Connally, President Nixon's special envoy, said today that he believed his talks with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and other Indian leaders had helped to mend relations be tween Washington and New Delhi.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, July 5—State Department officials said today that there was a strong likeli hood North Vietnam would be flooded later this summer, but they said North Vietnam's dike system would be responsible rather than American bombing raids.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, July 6—South Viet namese troops continued to close in on the heart of Quang tri city yesterday, as Saigon's counteroffensive to retake the country's northernmost prov ince entered its second week, still making slow but steady gains.
HONG KONG, July 5 (AP)— North Vietnam said today that it was getting war supplies through 12 “coastal points” that the United States had not been able to block.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, July 7 — The South Vietnamese task force pushing north sought yesterday to clear enemy resistance for the final assault to retake Quang tri city. To the south, the North Vietnamese countered by raining their heaviest shell ing attack to date on the ner vous city of Hue.
MOSCOW, June 6—The So viet Government voiced expres sions of continued support for Cuba today, but gave no indica tion of any specific new aid agreement.
WASILIINGTON, July 6 — President Nixon is waging the air war against North Vietnam with a decentralized system of Command and control that dif fers significantly from the highly centralited system em ployed by his predecessor, Lyn don B. Johnson, during the 1965–68 air campaign. In the view of a number of civilian and mil itary officials with experience in Indo china, the decen tralization does not imply the unraveling of ci vilian control over the military or the loosening of the chain of military command.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6 (UPI)—Fourteen Americans were reported killed in action last week, the highest toll in nearly two months, the United States command announced to day.
There is, it seems to me, a common inclination among most of us in New York to dismiss conditions in East Harlem as hopeless. Black and Puerto Rican babies will be hungry, children will not be able to read, teenagers will be addicts, families will live on welfare in dilapidated apartments without heat or hot water. Yet we can build a Gimbel's on East 86th Street, we can build luxury highrises up and down our avenues, we can go into Vietnam and damn the cost. Even more strangely, to me, we can have a model integrated public school on East 96th Street and Third Avenue while only ten or twenty blocks north the children in other public schools are brutalized by violence and drugs.
Renewed hopes for peace in Vietnam sent stock prices sharply higher yesterday, al though the market pared its best gains in late trading.
BUCHAREST, Rumania, July 6 — Secretary of State Wil liam P. Rogers was understood to have assured President Nico lae Ceausescu in a four‐hour meeting here today that there would be no Soviet‐United States deal at the expense of small powers.
Reports that the major Com munist powers were exerting pressure on North Vietnam to seek a settlement of the war sent bond prices broadly higher early yesterday in quickened trading activity.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, July 7 — The South Vietnamese task force pushing north sought yesterday to clear enemy resistance for the final assault to retake “Quang tri city. To the south, the North Vietnamese countered by raining their heaviest shell ing attack to date on the ner vous city of Hue.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 6 (Agence France‐Presse)—The North Vietnamese Foreign Min istry said today that American planes attacked inhabited areas of a dozen provinces yesterday, from the southernmost part of the country almost to the Chinese border.
Stock prices advanced sharp ly yesterday as hopes for peace in Vietnam swept through Wall Street. The Dow‐Jones indus trial average, ahead by nearly 18 points at 11 A.M., wound up with a gain of 8.66 at 942.13.
The stock market displayed an extreme sensitivity to hints of progress in the Vietnam peace negotiations yesterday with an extraordinary upward surge in response to an uncon firmed rumor from London. United Press International reported prior to the market open ing in New York that China and Russia had independently advised North Vietnam to settle with the United States “without much further delay.”
Stock prices advanced sharp ly yesterday as hopes for peace in Vietnam swept through Wall Street. The Dow‐Jones indus trial average, ahead by nearly 18 points at 11 A.M., wound up with a gain of 8.66 at 942.13.
WASHINGTON, July 7 (AP) —The Office of Federal Elec tions in the General Accounting Office asked the Attorney Gen eral today to sue the National Committee for Impeachment for alleged violation of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
TOKYO, July 7 (AP)—Pre mier Chou En‐lai of China had a “fraternal and cordial talk” in Peking today with Mr. Thuy, the North Vietnamese delegate to the Paris talks, Hsinhua, the Chinese press agency, re ported.
LAVANGHA, South Vietnam, Saturday, July 8 — Well‐en trenched and determined North Vietnamese troops fought a South Vietnamese advance to ward the provincial capital of Quangtri to a standstill yester day, and one Saigon element was forced to pull back after a strong enemy tank attack.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6—Senior United States air of ficers say American pilots have inflicted more damage on North Vietnam since April than they did in a full year of President Johnson's heavy bombing cam paign.
PARIS—Ngo Cong Duc, 36 years old, is a Roman Catholic from a prominent family in South. Vietnaties delta. The ranking Catholic prelate in Vietnam, Archbishop Binh, is a relative. Mr. Duc's father was assassinated in 1953 by the Communist‐led revolutionaries. He has been a Saigon newspaper editor and a member of the National Assembly.
There were drinks on the lawn and borscht and lobster and shrimp salad in the Susan E. Wagner room at Gracie Mansion as Mayor and Mrs. Lindsay paid trib ute to 50 “good citizens of New York City.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, July 8 (AP) — The United States command an nounced today that two American soldiers and six Vietnamese were wounded in two mistaken bombardments yesterday. Both incidents are under investigation, the com mand said.
PARIS, July 7—Nguyen Thanh Le, spokesman for North Viet nam's delegation to the peace talks, said today that President Nixon “still seeks a military victory” and that “he's not seek ing to negotiate.”
AGANA, Guam, Saturday, july 8 (AP)—A United States Air Force B‐52 bomber with a crew of six crashed into the Pacific today, en route from Guam to a bombing mission over Vietnam, the Air Force an nounced here.
PORTLAND, Ore., July 8— More than 300 former prisoners of war strongly condemned “draft dodgers and deserters” here yesterday and demanded humane treatment for Ameri can prisoners in Southeast Asia.
Great prominence has lately been given by the Nixon Administration to the industrial destruction caused by the bombing raids now being carried on over North Vietnam. Thus, on June 12 we were told that “U.S. jets have destroyed a hydroelectric plant capable of producing 75 per cent of North Vietnam's power requirements” and on June 25 the U.S. command in Sai gon reported that “fighter‐bombers have wrecked North Vietnam's only modern steel plant.”
WASHINGTON— Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, a prominent geophysicist who had just completed a tour as vice president of the Defense Department's Institute of Defense Analysis, pub lished in 1968 a little‐noted but chilling study on the military potential of meteorological warfare. He listed a number of options available to those who would choose to tamper with nature. Among them:
TOKYO, July 8 (AP)—Xuan Thuy, North Vietnamese chief delegate to the Paris peace talks, left Peking by air today for Paris after conferring with Premier Chou En‐lai, a Peking broadcast reported.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., July 8 — Henry A. Kissinger, the chief White House adviser on foreign affairs, said today that he had “some reason to be lieve” that North Vietnam was ready for “serious negotiations” looking toward an end of the war.
Much has been written since the end of the Supreme Court term 10 days ago about the dramatic con servative shift of the Court since the days of Chief Justice Earl Warren. Perhaps no single case of the recent term better illustrates that shift than the decision handed down on June 22. At issue: Property rights versus the right of free speech.
WASHINGTON, July 8—A survey of national television news programs accuses the three major networks of “a significant degree of bias” in their reporting of the Demo cratic primary campaign and the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, July 8—A survey of national television news programs accuses the three major networks of “a significant degree of bias” in their reporting of the Demo cratic primary campaign and the Vietnam war.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 8—This correspondent and a group of other foreign news men were taken at dawn today to the town of Hungyen, 36 miles east of Hanoi, which was said to have been struck by American bombs yesterday.
TOKYO, July 8 (AP)—B‐52 bombers landed on Okinawa to day and the Japanese Govern ment told the United States Embassy that it would not be desirable for B‐52 visits there to become routine, a Japanese spokesman reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, July 9 — South Viet namese troops were still stalled outside the provincial capital of Quangtri yesterday, held off by intense enemy artillery and mortar fire.
SAIGON, July 8 (Reuters)— Two United States Phantom jet aircraft were shot down by North. Vietnamese MIG‐21's northeast of Hanoi last Wednes day, the United States command reported today. The four crew men are listed as missing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 8 (Reuters)—A Chinese freighter was identified on Thursday night about two miles off the North Viet namese coast unloading cargo into barges that were ferry ing it to shore, the United States command said today.
PEKING, July 8 (Agence France‐Presse)—Foreign Minis ter Maurice Schumann of France and Foreign Minister Chi Peng‐fei of China met for three hours today to discuss Asian and Middle Eastern ques tions. The session followed their first talk yesterday, which was reported to have dealt with Vietnam and Europe. Mr. Schu mann arrived Thursday for a five‐day visit.
TOKYO, July 8 (UPI)—The North Vietnamese press agency said today that five United States warplanes had been shot down over North Vietnam dur ing the day.
SAIGON—“Today, Quangtri city has been recaptured,” President Nguyen Van Thieu announced triumphantly last Friday. “I believe this is the start ing point of the complete and final failure of the Northern Communist invaders.”
AGANA, Guam, Sunday, July 9 (AP)—Two American sub marines rescued six crewmen from the Pacific yesterday a day after they had ejected from a B‐52 bomber that crashed into the sea, officials said to day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, July 10—The South Vietnamese force trying to re capture the provincial capital of Quangtri, which was taken by the North Vietnamese two months ago, apparently re mained bogged down on the edge of the town yesterday un der a hail of Communist ar tillery and mortar shells.
LAVANG, South Vietnam, July 9—With the constant ex press‐train sound of shells speeding overhead, with the ground quaking from tens of thousands of bombs and shells, and with the night sky red with the fire of war, the battle for Quangtri has all the looks of a historic showdown between two mighty armies, It is an awesome specta cle, and there is no denying the deadly reality of the shards of steel ripping through the groves of banana trees, the stands of bamboo, and mercifully rarely, through human beings.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9 (AP)—United States Air Force jets shot down three MIG‐21's trying to intercept them, the United States command an nounced today.
PEKING, July 9 (Reuters)— Premier Chou En‐Lai, in a speech tonight five days before the resumption of the Vietnam peace talks in Paris, said that the majority of world public opinion, including that in the United States, was strongly de manding that the United States Government end the war in Vietnam “at an early date through serious negotiations.”
MOSCOW, July 9 (Reuters)— Xuan Thuy, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator at the Paris peace talks, arrived here today en route to the talks, which are scheduled to resume on Thursday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9 — President Nguyen Van Thieu, in a move certain to be popular among his people, has reversed his own decrees that would have made more South Vietnamese men eligible for military service.
To the Editot;
The bond market, forced to survive of late on a skimpy diet of largely offsetting external influences—such as turmoil in foreign exchnge and rumors of Communist pressure on Hanoi to seek peace in Vietnam — will have a chance this week to feast on a heavy meal of new financings. The amount it can handle without reaching satiety will provide important clues to the near‐term course of interest rates.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, July 10—The 11, 000‐ton British freighter Lon don Statesman was sunk early today by two explo sions while at anchor in the harbor of Nhatrang on South Vietnam's central coast.
ROME, July 9—Pope Paul VI asked the parties in the Viet nam war today to spare the Indochinese populations further suffering and show “courage for peace” in the negotiations reopening in Paris this week.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, July 10—Brig. Gen. Richard Tallman, the deputy American commander and ad viser for the Saigon Military Region, and three other Ameri cans were killed yesterday by a North Vietnamese artillery shell during an inspection visit to Anloc.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9 (AP)—The aircraft carrier America, normally a part of the ica, normally a part of the United States Atlantic fleet, has replaced the carrier Coral Sea in the Seventh Fleet operating off Vietnam, the Navy an nounced today.
HONG KONG, July 10 (Reu ters)—North Vietnam heaped scorn today on South Vietnam ese attempts to move into Quangtri City and derided what it called Saigon's “imaginary successes” in its current push northward.
PARIS. July 10 (Rcuters)— North Vietnam's chief negotia tor, Xuan Thuy, arrived here today for the resumption on Thursday of the Vietnam peace talks amid American hopes of an early breakthrough that could lead to an end of the war.
SAIGON, July 10 (Reuters)— The South Vietnamese National Bank announced today a uni fied rate for the piaster at 425 to the United States dollar fol lowing a Presidential order abolishing the system of paral lel exchange rates.
GRENOBLE, France, July 10 (Reuters) — Pierre Mendes France, the French Premier who negotiated an Indochina peace settlement in 1954, said today that he believed the scene had been set for an American pull out in Vietnam while saving American face.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 10 (AP) — United States troop strength in Vietnam was reduced by 500 men last week, the United States com mand reported today.
The stock market, continuing its recent choppy pattern, was jolted yesterday by large losses in individual issues. To Wall Street watchers, this was a sure sign of general investor wariness amid the uncertain ties of economics, politics and Vietnam.
TOKYO, July 10 (Reuters)— Japan asked the United States today not to use Okinawa as a base for American bombing raids on North Vietnam, the Foreign Ministry said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, July 11—South Viet namese paratroops and marines fought at least five clashes with the North Vietnamese Army yesterday within a few miles of Communist ‐ occupied Quangtri city, but with no apparent change in the over‐all situation.
PEKING — Support of North Vietnam is a ordinal principle of Chinese policy and will con tinue as long as the war goes on, and the United States should have no illusions on this score.
SEOUL, South Korea, July 10 (AP)—South Korea will with draw its 37,000 troops still in Vietnam “as soon as possible” after Aug. 31, the Defense Min ister, Dr. Yu Jae Hung, told the National Assembly today.
BANGKOK, Thailand, July 10 (UP!) —Two American pilots were killed Friday when their F‐4 Phantom jet crashed at the Ubonratchthani air base about 200 miles northeast of Bang kok, a United States Embassy spokesman reported today. The pilots were identified as Maj. Harland M. Davis Jr., 37 years old, of Bridgeton, N.J., and First Lieut. Frederick Koss, 26, of Bridgeport, Ohio. They were trying to land during a rain storm on returning from a combat mission over Vietnam, the spokesman said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 10 (Reuters)—Military sources reported that longshoremen un loading rice from a British freighter early this morning at the South Vietnamese port of Nhatrang had planted time fused explosives that ripped two holes in the ship's hull.
LONDON, July 10—A nego tiated settlement of the Vietnam war could help the weakened dollar recover in Europe's money‐trading centers, foreign exchange dealers said as the dollar strengthened a little today, just three days before renewed peace talks begin in Paris.
LOS ANGELES, July 11—The judge's questioning today of prospective jurors in the trial of Dr. Daniel Ellsberg and An thony J. Russo Jr. indicated deep division of opinion about the Vietnam war.
HONG KONG, Wednesday, July 12 (Reuters)—North Viet nam said today that six United States aircraft had been shot down in North Vietnam and “many U.S. pilots captured.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11 (AP) — The names of three American officers who were killed Sunday at Anloc with Brig. Gen. Richard J. Tall man were released today.
MIAMI BEACH, July 11—American politics is a savage business. The win ners here at Miami Beach, like George McGovern, have more to do than they can remember, and the losers, like Hubert Humphrey, have more to forget than they can bear.
“I haven't resigned,” said Otto F. Otepka, “I've retired.” Thus the controversial con servative confirmed his de parture, effective June 30, from a $36,000‐a‐year post on the almost moribund Sub versive Activities Control Board, a position he had held for nearly two years without Senate confirmation.
ROME, July 11—Secretary of State William P. Rodgers dis‐ closed today that Pope Paul VI had unsuccessfully tried to ar range for an exchange of pris oners of war in Vietnam.
MIAMI BEACH, Wednesday, July 12—The Democratic Na tional Convention rejected by an overwhelming majority early today a move by supporters of Gov. George C. Wallace to rewrite the party's platform along conservative, antibusing, pro‐military lines.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., July 11 (AP) —A group of antiwar vet erans sitting out the Democratic National Convention at a grand jury session here ran around a United States Post Office today singing Army “running songs” and waving plastic machine guns.
A recent issue carried a troublesome letter by Ira Glasser, the New York Civil Liberties Union executive direc tor. His view is that the Vietnam war is illegal, immoral and criminal and that protests against the war are not being listened to. He states that less temperate people must be frustrated and, if those in power do not listen, “people will stop talking” and this will be dangerous “to the basic structure of liberty.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11 (UPI)—The Hanoi radio said tonight that Vietcong lead ers had elected a provincial People's Revolutionary Com mittee for Quangtri last month.
HONG KONG, Wednesday, July 12 (Reuters)—North Viet nam's senior Politburo mem ber, Le Duc Tho, has arrived in Peking from Hanoi on his way to Paris for resumption of the Vietnam's peace talks tomorrow, Hsinhua, the offi cial Chinese press agency, said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, July 12—Reliable military sources here and on the northern front reported to day that the South Vietnamese were not going to try to recap ture the well‐defended provin cial capital of Quangtri at this time. Rather, they said, Sai gon's forces are going to try to isolate the city and hope it falls by attrition.
MIAMI BEACH, July 11 — Not long after a zealous se curity agent tossed a shouting representative of the Gay Cau cus out of the lobby of the Doral Hotel here this afternoon, about two dozen blacks lobby ing on behalf of the poor began chanting “soul power.”
MIAMI BEACH, Wednesday, July 12 — Senators Hubert H. Humphrey and Edmund S. Mus kie surrendered the Democratic Presidential nomination yester day to their colleague, George McGovern, and with different degrees of enthusiasm sum moned him to reunite the party.
HONG KONG, Wednesday, July 12 (AP)—The Vietcong accused the United States to day of using lethal “toxic chemical” bombs and artil lery shells that “killed hundreds and sickened thou sands” in Communist occupied areas of Quangtri and Thuathien provinces in northern South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON—The greatest test of imagination for the Nixon Administra tion at the present time will be for it to negotiate a settlement of the Viet nam war while it thinks it is winning.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, July 13—South Viet namese marines and airborne troops clashed heavily with de fenders on three sides of the provincial capital of Quangtri yesterday the Saigon com mand said its troops had de stroyed more than 20 enemy tanks, but indications were that Government forces had lost some ground.
MIAMI BEACH, Thursday, July 13—The Alabama legisla tor who announced his state's votes in the Democratic con vention's Presidential nomina tion last night said early today that Gov. George C. Wallace had asked him to announce that he would not run as a third party candidate this year.
With the announcement of United States grain sales to the U.S.S.R. and the sale of Boeing 707's to the People's Republic of China I think back on the “domino theory” argument of Dean Rusk and the Johnson Administration.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 12 (UPI)—Military sources to day denied a Vietcong charge that American planes were dropping toxic or poisonous bombs in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, July 12— Senator George McGovern's over‐all record in public life is basically that of a conven tional liberal.
Your excellent June 30 editorial “The Key to Vietnam” confirms some views I heard various officials express when I was in China in June.
Following are excerpts from statements by Senator George McGovern on a num ber of issues:
It is “traditional” for the Oriental to wish to “save face.” While we want to get out of Vietnam gracefully, we refuse to let the “enemy engaged in a civil war do likewise.”
If the eyes did not deceive, the rapport of spring sum mitry was out the window and the shoe‐pounding diplo macy of Nikita S. Khrushchev was back in fashion. There stood Anatoly F. Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador, clutching a boulder as though ready to smash it down on the curly head of Henry A. Kissinger, the President's national security adviser. “Throw it at me,” dared Mr. Kissinger in a display of brinkmanship. Mrs. Dobrynin, holding a camera, prepared to record the decline and fall. But the eyes did deceive. The boulder was made of sponge rubber and packed as much menace as Godzilla.
The resumption of the Paris peace talks today opens what is probably the last effort by both sides to end the Vietnam war before the American elections.
WASHINGTON, July 12—The Nixon Administration, con cerned that the scope and char acter‐ of the North Vietnamese offensive have pointed up cer tain weaknesses in South Viet nam's long‐term ability to de fend itself, is looking for ways to shore up its defenses.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 12—The hostility of many Vietnamese military men to ward foreign newsmen has reached a new high.
WASHINGTON, July 12—Ther Defense Department and a French correspondent in North Vietnam were in sharp dispute today over whether United States planes deliberately bombed dikes yesterday near a village 37 miles southeast of Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, July 13—The State Department said today that it could draw no initial encouragement from what it called “the pretty stiff” statements made by the North Vietnamese and Vietcong at the Paris talks, which resumed this morning.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 13 (AP)—Four Americans were killed in combat in Vietnam last week, five died from other causes and five others were missing in action, the United States command announced in its weekly casualty report. Eighteen Americans were wounded, the command added.
MIAMI BEACH, July 13—The Democrats came out of their convention In fairly good order, with George McGovern crying, “Come home, America!” In McGovern and Eagleton they have ticket that runs no farther than from Missouri to South Dakota, but at least they avoided the worst of their nightmares, and they're not deceiving themselves about the magnitude of their problems.
ROME, July 13—Premier Gitilio Andreotti's new Government a coalition of centrist parties, won a vote of confidence in the Senate today, 163 to 155.
LOS ANGELES, July 13—Attitudes toward the Vietnam war appeared to be a factor today in challenges to prospective jurors by the prosecution and defense In the Pentagon Papers case.
WASHINGTON, July 13 (AP) —The Defense Department today listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in the Indochina war:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 13 (AP)—Some American helicopters in Vietnam are carrying tear‐gas canisters to prevent groups of panic‐stricken soldiers or civilian refugees from dragging them down in efforts to scramble aboard.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., July 13 —A Federal district judge tonight jailed four members of the Vietnam Veterans against the War for refusing to assist in a Justice Department investigation of the organization.
People usually sue first and, if disappointed, carry their case to the Supreme Court. Maryann Clifford is different. Miss Clifford, who plans to enter law school this autumn, went to the United States Supreme Court first, seeking one of the summer messenger jobs customarily made available to law students.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 13 (UPI) — Michel Dumond, a French freelance photographer who has been missing in a Communist‐controlled area for more than three months, walked into a South Vietnamese Army camp northwest of Saigon today, apparently in good condition.
WASHINGTON, July 13—For more than 2,000 years the peasants of northern Vietnam have been locked in unending battle against nature, trying to stem and control the annual high waters of the Red River with an intricate system of dikes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, July 14 — The fighting around the city of Quangtri became heavier yesterday as the North Vietnamese again counterattacked with tanks against the South Vietnamese forces that partly ring the city.
PARIS, July 13—The North Vietnamese delegation seemed to offer a subtle change today in its negotiating position at the Paris peace talks, which resumed after a 10‐week hiatus.
Following is the prepared text of Senator George McGovern's speech accepting the Democratic Presidential nomination:
Reporters of The Times and others, continue to insist that Hanoi's disappointments on the battlefields of South Vietnam are almost totally attributable to our escalated use of airpower. Such a view assumes that the communist military did not anticipate our aerial response when planning this offensive.
WASHINGTON, July 14 (Reuters) — The State Department rebuked Miss Fonda today after reports that she had made antiwar broadcasts in Hanoi.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., July 14—John B. Connally, the Texas Democrat who was Presilent Nixon's Treasury Secretary, announced today that he would support Mr. Nixon's reelection and spend most of his time until November attemptmg to persuade Other Democrats to do likewise.
TOKYO, July 14 (UPI) Jane Fonda, who is on a visit to Hanoi, asked United States pilots to reconsider their participation in the Vietnam war in a broadcast yesterday over the Voice of Vietnam Radio, the North Vietnamese press agency said today.
SAN DIEGO, Calif., July 14 (AP) — Senator Barry M. Goldwater says that he thinks the Vietnam war will end within 60 days.
GAINESVILLE, Fla., July 14 (UPI)—William L. Calley Sr., whose son is under sentence for the murder of 22 Vietnamese civilians a Mylai, South Vietnam, died last night in the Veorans Hospital shortly after his son visited him.
LOS ANGELES, July 14—A panel of prospective jurors that had initially “appalled” defense lawyers in the Pentagon papers case indicated today under questioning criticism of the Vietnam war and the Government's security classification system.
PARIS, July 14 (Reuters)—Le Duc Tho of the North Vietnamese Politburo will arrive tomorrow, the Hanoi delegation at the peace talks said today. Mr. Tho has met more than 10 times with Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser for national security, and it was Mourat here that another series of similar contacts might be at hand.
WASHINGTON, July 14 (AP) —State Department officials said today that a close examination would be made of North Vietnamese statements at the resumed Paris peace talks, but the general attitude appeared negative toward any new initiatives from Hanoi.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, July 15—South Vietnamese marines trying to complete the encirclement of Communist‐occupied Quangtri reportedly fought a three‐hour battle yesterday two to four miles northeast of the city.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., July 14 —Six national leaders of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War were indicted today on charges that they had conspired to disrupt the Republican National Convention next month with firebombs and shootings.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 14 (AP)—Yves‐Michel Dumont, a French photographer released by the North Vietnamese yesterday after more than three months in captivity, said today that two American advisers had been captured with him and that he had seen a third captive American in Cambodia.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., July 15 — The Vietnam Veterans Against the War charged today that the Federal indictment of six of its members for plotting disruption of the Republican National Convention next month was based on the “false testimony” of an informer for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
PARIS, July 15—Le Duc Tho, the ranking North Vietnamese negotiator, arrived here today and expressed readiness to resume his brokeh‐off dialogue with Henry A. Kissinger.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, July 16 (AP) — United, States 13–52's bombed bunkers and inflicted heavy casualties on North Vietnamese around the provincial capital of Quangtri, the United States command said yesterday. It estimated that the bombers had killed about 300 enemy soldiers in two raids.
The impending resumption of peace talks in Laos adds a hopeful note to the renewed Vietnam negotiations Paris. Indeed, it was seemingly the possibility that an accord in Vietnam might finally be achieved that triggered the Laotian move.
MIAMI BEACH—The nation is now, at the same time, waging war in Vietnam, negotiating peace and fighting a Presidential election in which the tactics and objectives of the war—even the continuation of the war—are central issues. And this creates the delicate and awkward problem for both President Nixon and Senator McGovern of arguing out the issues of the war without interfering with their common objective of ending the killing in Southeast Asia.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., July 15 — Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that there appeared to be “some slight nuances” of difference from past positions in the statements made by North Vietnamese negotiators in the Paris peace talks this week.
OKLAHOMA CITY, July 15 (AP)—The civilian lawyer for Lieut. William L. Calley said today he would seek a new trial for Calley because of the discovery of a witness to the Mylai massacre who the Army contended was missing at the time of the lieutenant's original court‐martial.
WASHINGTON—Congress, more preoccupied for the past six months with politicking than legislating, reconvenes tomorrow, apparently headed for a repeat performance of 1960 when It met after the Presidential conventions only to find itself so caught up in partisan squabbling that it could not act.
With a flare for “guerilla theater” that has won them publicity again and again, the Vietnam Veterans Against the War have emerged as one of the most outspoken peace groups in the country.
WASHINGTON, July 15—The United States is reported to have refined its electronics intelligence techniques to the point where it can break Soviet codes, listen to and understand Soviet communications and coding systems and keep track of virtually every Soviet jet plane or missile‐carrying submarine around the world.
WASHINGTON—Ever since, the American air campaign over North Vietnam was resumed early in April, Hanoi had been charging—and Washington had been denying—that the North's highly vulnerable river‐dike system was being bombed. By the end of last month the controversy had swelled Into an international propaganda war, with some Hanoi‐based journalists and diplomats reporting that the dikes were indeed being hit by bombs.
PARIS—“We start once again with good weather,” said North Vietnam's spokesman, Nguyen Thanh Le. “But this beautiful sun does not shine on any new American proposals, so there is no sunshine in the conference room.”
SAIGON. South Vietnam, July 16 (AP) — The father of a student who was shot to death here after he tried to hijack a jumbo jet is being held by the South Vietnamese police, who refuse to give any season for his detention.
WASHINGTON, July 16 (UPI) —President Nixon's top campaign organizers expressed concern in television interviews today that militant demonstrators would disrupt the Republican National Convention in August at Miami Beach and “make it difficult to have our convention in peace.”
WASHINGTON, July 16—Sig Mickelson, a former president of C.B.S. News, said today he was resigning as director of the nonprofit, nonpartisan American Institute for Political Communication, He gave as his reason “dissatisfaction with the methods used” by the institute in releasing the results of a study charging the three television networks with “a significant degree of bias” in their news reporting.
Rules on Air Strikes in South Vietnam Allow Leeway
SAIGON. South Victnzm, Monday. July 17 (AP)—Unitcd States B‐52 bombers attacked North Vietnamese bases and reinforcements on both sides of the demilitarized zone yesterday and today in some of the heaviest raids of the war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 17 (UPI)—President Nguyen Van Thieu's new martial‐law decree provides jail terms for strikers, curfew violators and agitators, and allows the police to shoot to kill motorists who disregard orders to halt, the Government press agency said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 17 (AP) — American troop strength in South Vietnam dropped by 300 men last week to 47,200, the United States command reported today.
QUANGTRT, South Vietnam, July 17 — This city of rubble and ashes trembled to the incessant roar of gunfire today as South Vietnamese paratroops battled their way inch by inch toward its center.
WASHINGTON, July 17—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. laird questioned today the credibility of Senator George Mc Govern's pledge to secure the quick release of American war prisoners from North Vietnam if he is elected President.
LOS ANGELES, July 17—As the selection of the jury in the Pentagon papers trial moved into its second week today, it became virtually certain that the jury would contain some strong critics of the Vietnam war.
CUSTER, S. D., July 17—Senator George McGovern, moving to unite the splintered Democratic party, offered today to meet with 150 presidents of international labor unions “to talk about our common interests and discuss any differences we may have.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 17 (AP) —The Saigon command has temporarily suspended the military press accreditation of Richard H. Pyle, chief Associated Press correspondent here, asserting that the A.P. had violated ground rules in releasing news of South Vietnam's northern counteroffensive.
President Nixon's one‐time forecast that the Vietnam war would not be a 1972 campaign issue is unlikely to be fulfilled by the kind of slanderous attack on war criticism that was revived last week by the President's’ Democratic apologist, John B. Connally of Texas.
HONG KONG, July 17 (AP) —North Vietnam has ordered all its citizens mobilized for the work force—“to serve in any capacity or any mission assigned them”—and has warned that those who disobey will have to perform up to two years’ forced labor.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, July 18 (AP)—The South Vietnamese counter offensive in Quangtri Province was reported backed yesterday by some of the heaviest United States air and naval attacks of the war.
The Times of July 3 reported that U.S. Government sources have confirmed that the U.S. has been secretly seeding clouds over North Vietnam, Laos and South Vietnam to increase and control the rainfall for military purposes. This new class of weaponry should be viewed openly with utmost seriousness by all.
NEW ORLEANS, July 18 (UPI)—The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit ordered today the release of four members of Vietnam Veterans Against the War who had been jailed in Florida, and a motion for reduction of bail was filed for three other members.
Dressed in a purple mantle, gold stole and pallium,” Dimitrios I, was enthroned in Istanbul as Ecumenical Patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church and spiritual leader of the church's 125 million members.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July, 18 — Two foreign affairs specialists from the United States Senate staff asked senior American military officer, during a recent briefing in Saigon, what would have happened if the South Vietnamese had not had American air support during the current North Vietnamese offensive. “We would be meeting in some other place today,” the officer replied.
To the Editor: In order to avoid another and much worse “Vietnam” in the Middle East and in order to insure a foreign policy that works in the best interests of the United States of America, I urgently recommend that the Middle East issue be left out of the coming Presidential campaign.
BERKELEY, Calif., July 18 (AP) — A 26‐year‐old antiwar activist credited by Ramparts Magazine as the source for an article on National Security Agency intelligence‐gathering said today that he had spoken out to “make sure there are no more Vietnams.”
SAIGON, July 18 — Two heavy explosions of undetermined origin nearly sank the Seventh Fleet destroyer Warrington in the Gulf of Tonkin 20 miles off the coast and the North Vietnamese city of Donghoi yesterday, the United States command here reported today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, July 19 (AP)—South Vietnamese troops reportedly inched closer to the walled Citadel of Quangtri city yesterday as bitter house‐tohouse fighting continued.
To the Editor: Of all the transparent exhibitions of slanting the news, your “From Saigon Mother” (Op‐Ed June 27) takes the biscuit. I admire the esprit de corps among your editors. What a pity some of the spirit cannot be channeled into backing our own soldiers engaged in a war for the self‐determination of Southeast Asia. It is a battle in which American lives are at stake and the lives of the women and children of our present comrades in arms, defending their land against flagrant invasion.
SAIGON, July 19 (UPI)—A United States Air Force F‐4 Phantom jet fighter‐bomber chased a North Vietnamese MIG‐21 at low level yesterday, then shot the MIG down 15 miles from Hanoi, military spokesmen said today.
VINHKIM, South Vietnam, July 18—Ho Van Bao hurriedly stuffed his squealing baby pigs into a big shipping basket.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, July 20 (AP) North Vietnamese infantrymen and tanks counterattacked in Quangtri yesterday but reportedly failed to halt a slow South Vietnamese paratrooper advance toward the provincial capital's walled Citadel.
WASHINGTON, July 19—The White House and the North Vietnamese Government announced simultaneously today that Henry A. Kissinger had conferred secretly in Paris during the day with Hanoi negotiators.
WASHINGTON, July 19—An article published today in Nhan Dan, the official press agency of North Vietnam, praised Senator George McGovern as representing the change demanded by the American people.
WASHINGTON, July 19—Senator John Sherman Cooper, la leader of antiwar Republicans in the Senate, proposed today the unconditional withdrawal of all American forces from Indochina within four months.
Senator George McGovern's appearance July 12 before dissident elements in the lobby of the Doral Hotel was indeed a remarkable event. After having prevailed upon local police not to break up this peaceful group who sincerely felt disillusioned by the wording of a statement on Vietnam, Senator McGovern risked further embarrassment and confusion by agreeing to submit to such questioning.
MIAMI. July 19 (AP)—Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh will head a Vietcong delegation to Cuba this weekend to attend a rally, commemorating the start of the Castro revolution, the Havana radio said today.
AUSTIN, Tex., July 19 (UPI) —William Patterson, declaring that he had committed no crime except expressing his revulsion at the war in Vietnam, surrendered to United States marshals today and was charged with conspiring to disrupt next month's Republican National Convention.
Bond prices inched ahead early yesterday on the hope that Presidential adviser Henry Kissinger's secret journey to Paris would result in some break in deadlocked peace talks on Vietnam.
To the Editor: Nguyen Thai Binh, shot five times on a Pan American 747 at Saigon [news story July 3], died a hero.
MISSOULA, Mont., July 16—Well‐informed civilian and military sources have disclosed that in an effort to clear away enemy‐controlled forests, the United States made a number of concerted attempts to set huge fire storms in Vietnam during 1966 and 1967. The project was ultimately abandoned, they said, because the moist tropical rain forest would not burn.
The position stated by Xuan Thuy, the chief North Vietnamese delegate, at the July 13 session of the Paris peace talks, that the United States could end its “intervention in the internal affairs of Vietnam” without dealing with the question of “power in Saigon,” strongly suggests that the prospect of an agreement among China, the Soviet Union and the United States to discontinue supplying any military equipment to any Vietnamese forces might be the key element necessary for the success of the current negotiations, and the return of our prisoners of war.
To the Editor: Re Anthony Lewis’ July 2 column, “Back to the Stone Age”—Twentyseven years ago this country bombed two smaller nations—Germany and Japan—back a good ways for the same reason we are now bombing North Vietnam: They attacked their neighbors with armed force.
To the Editor: Your editorial (July 13) correctly states that the resumption of the Paris peace talks offers the last chance to end the Vietnam war before the American elections.
PARIS, July 20—The formal Vietnamese peace talks continued today,. but they only marked time in the wake of renewed private contacts between Hanoi's Le Duc Tho and Henry A. Kissinger in Paris yesterday.
WASHINGTON, July 20—Gerald Warren, deputy press secretary at the White House, said tonight that the Administration had no immediate comment on Dr. Blake's charge that United States planes were deliberately bombing North Vietnamese dikes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 20 (AP) — The United States command today listed eight Americans as killed in action in Indochina last week, four more than the previous week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, July 21—The South Vietnamese armed forces, already pushing to recapture lost territory in northern Quangtri Province, have begun a second counteroffensive to retake Communist‐held areas — this time in Binhdinh Province on the central coast.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., July 20 (UPO)—Three members of Vietnam Veterans Against the War posted bonds totaling $75,000 today and walked away after week in jail, calling the Federal conspiracy charges against them “garbage.”
GENEVA, July 20—The Rev. Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, Secretary General of the World Council of Churches, has written President Nixon that he believes that United States planes are deliberately bombing dikes in North Vietnam.
MYCHANH, South Vietnam, July 21—A kind of random killing has begun all along Route 1 south of Quangtri, in which there seems to be no safe place for anyone, especially the cursing drivers of trucks, tanks and ambulances jammed up for miles.
WASHINGTON, July 21—The Central Intelligence Agency has begun a public battle against accusations that it knew of but failed to stem the heroin traffic of United States allies in Southeast Asia.
By now most people must know something about the political vaudeville troupe formed by Jane Fonda, Donald Sutherland and others to offer soldiers an alternate entertainment to say, Bob Hope, or whatever shows are provided by the U.S.O. The troupe called itself F.T.A., which stands for Free Theater Associates, or for other things such as, Free the Army.Last year, against considerable official opposition, it toured United States military bases in the Pacific. Francine Parker's "F.T.A.," which opened yesterday at the Baronet and Victoria theaters, is a documentary about aspects of that tour.The film divides its attention pretty evenly between the performers and their audience, and a lot of time is given to interviews with dissident, or merely disillusioned, servicemen. Some hate the war in Vietnam. Some just voice dismay at certain truths about the military like "They don't want you to be an individual") that have been perpetually rediscovered by raw recruits at least since the Battle of Thermopylae.So much time is given to the audience, whose insights, though real, are neither original nor profound, that the actual performance comes across in scattered bits and pieces.A lot of the show must have been very funny, with a kind of humor genuinely in touch with the desperation borne of simply being in the service. (Army doctor prescribing to obviously pregnant wife of enlisted man: "Go home and take two A.P.C. tablets and come back when your swelling goes down.")But as presented in the movie, most of the show doesn't seem very funny, except inadvertently—as when Donald Sutherland seriously recites the prose of Dalton Trumbo with a straight-from-the-shoulder solemnity that happens to be perfectly in keeping with his phony-preacher characterization in Jules Feiffer's "Little Murders."Occasionally the F.T.A. troupe becomes involved with the local population, so that we may hear the Just Grievances Against American Imperialism of the people of Okinawa or Japan or wherever Miss Fonda and her colleagues happen to be listening. I found most of this a predictable bore, but it did allow for the film's only really striking sequence: an anti-American guerrilla theater pageant in the Philippines that momentarily turns revolutionary passion into a romantic gesture of extraordinary beauty.Otherwise there are a few good things. There is the lovely ballad singing of Rita Martinson (most of the singing, by Len Chandler, isn't so lovely), some hints at lively routines, an occasional glimpse of deep happiness in eyes of Miss Fonda or of Holly Near. But the spirit of F.T.A. must lie elsewhere, in other times and special places. For all its agility and pressing close-ups, the film doesn't capture that spirit—or even adequately show the kind of experience that might have let it grow.
NEW BRAUNFELS, Tex—A shbeless 21‐year‐old MexicanAmerican meekly approached the Veterans Administration “vans that were parked in the shade of a mulberry tree behind the civic center and asked if he could file a disability claim for severe burns he suffered a year ago in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, July 21 (UPI) — Jerry W. Friedheim, the Pentagon spokesman, denied today that American attempts to destroy enemy cover in South Vietnam through forest fires had ever been secret or that the measures had been intended to produce devastating fire storms of the kind that ravaged aerial targets in Germany and Japan in World War II.
To the Editor: Tributes to John Paul Vann, who died recently in a helicopter crash near Kontum, have recognized his role as principal architect of the pacification program, his complete personal commitment to the U.S. undertaking in Vietnam and his outstanding qualities of personal courage and blunt, critical honesty. But they have not recognized the paradox that necessarily resulted when these qualities combined in one man.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, July 22 — South Vietnamese troops reportedly recaptured a district capital on the central coast yesterday without a fight—almost as they had lost it to Communist forces nearly three months ago.
Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, Secretary General of the World Council of Churches, has posed “an issue of supreme urgency and moral import” to the President and people of the United States with his letter to President Nixon charging that United States planes are deliberately bombing dikes in North Vietnam and appealing to President Nixon to order an immediate halt to these actions.
MOSCOW, July 22—Secretary General Waldheim of the United Nations ended a week's visit to the Soviet Union today after having expressed concern over allegations that the United States was bombing dikes in North Vietnam.
ON ROUTE THIRTEEN, in South Vietnam, July 21—South Vietnamese troops, after being stalled for three and a half months on Route 13 north of Saigon, are making what appears to be their first significant progress toward breaking through and opening up this crucial road to the rubber‐plantation town of Anloc, which still has to get all its supplies and troop reinforcements by air.
To the Editor: The Times reports (July 14) that President Nixon has instructed Kissinger to arrange briefings for George McGovern on foreign policy and intelligence matters, in accordance with the practice begun in 1952 by President Truman. Perhaps it is time to end this tradition, at least in the special circumstances of the current campaign.
There was an atmosphere of expectation about the Vietnam peace talks last week. Henry Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser, and Le Duc Tho, a member of North Vietnam's Politboro, had resumed their intermittent dialogue in Paris.
To ma EDITOR: Gene Thornton in his review of “war photography” has missed the lessons of both the Vietnam war and David Douglas Duncan's pictures.
WASHINGTON, July 22 (UPI) —Senator Gaylord Nelson said today that he would try to emend the military authorization bill to prohibit funding for weather modification and incendiary activities as United States war techniques.
The anti‐imperialists of 1898 to 1904, long ignored, have been honored as prophets within the past several years by protesters seeking withdrawal from Vietnam. The antiimperialists’ protests against military coercion of far‐off dark‐skinned peoples and their warnings against the perils and iniquities of empire have acquired a new cogency. Daniel B. Schirmer's is one of several fullscale studies to appear since Americans became involved in Vietnam—and, although his New Left interpretations (for the most part) follow a familiar outline, his is one of the most thoughtful and interesting of the accounts. The main thrust is an economic determinism that is by no means an innovation of the New Left, since it represents pretty much the ideology of the anti‐imperialists themselves — and of American protesters against involvement in war and overseas interventions throughout the 1920's and 1930's.
TOKYO, Sunday, July 23 (AP) —North Vietnam said today that its antiaircraft gunners shot down seven American planes yesterday when waves of them attacked residential areas in Hanoi and the provinces of Namha, Ninhbinh and Nghean.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, July 23—Route 1, the vital supply link between Hue and the counterattacking Government troops in Quangtri Province to the north, remained virtually cut yesterday by North Vietnamese soldiers who have dug in along its sides.
Back in the late 1960's, a contingent of foresters from the United States Department of Agriculture was hard at work in South Vietnam trying to develop the timber industry in that country's lush forests, which produce fine mahogany and other valued hardwoods. They might have been surprised to learn that, simultaneously, other Forest Service experts were trying just as hard to burn some of those forests down.
TO THE EDITOR: I do not know who Gene Thornton is; for all I know he may be the world's foremost photo critic (or whatever ene calls whatever he does). But one thing I do know, at least on the evidence of his column (concerning two photo exhibitions on the Vietnam war), he is the world's foremost practitioner of the non sequitur. What sense does it make to ask (rhetorically, perhaps?) that if war pictures “do not change anything, if things just go rolling on the same old way In spite of them what do they do?” Did Tolstoy's ‘War and Peace” change anything? What did it do?
The trend of events in the election is now clearly running with President Nixon. On the surface, the U.S. economy is turning up, the war in Vietnam is winding down, the Paris peace talks sound a little more hopeful, Cairo is expelling some of the Soviet fliers and missile technicians and Moscow is buying American farm surpluses and negotiating even more significant trade deals with Secretary of Commerce Peterson and U. S. industrialists.
CUSTER. S. D., July 23 —Senator George McGovern made today what appeared to be a peace overture to former President Lyndon B. Johnson, the man whose Vietnam policies he has criticized long and severely.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, July 24 — United States fighter bombers have attacked two large supply complexes in Hanoi, an American military spokesman said last night.
HAILANG, South Vietnam, July 23 (AP)—United States advisers said today that they had been ordered not to talk to newsmen about action in South Vietnam's northern offensive.
SAIGON, Monday, July 24 (Reuters) — South Vietnamese Rangers led by armored cars fought their way into the southern half of Kompong Trabek town in southeast Cambodia last night, military sources said.
Before his election as President, Richard M. Nixon described the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, which recently held its annual meeting in Australia, as “a somewhat anachronistic relic.” That negative assessment would appear to have been strengthened, if anything, by developments during the Nixon Presidency so far—the avowed attempt to extricate the United States from South Vietnam, the Nixon doctrine calling for a lower American profile abroad and self‐reliance on the part allies, and above all, the President's overtures and visit to China, the original target of the late Secretary of State Dulles 1954 defensive alliance in Asia.
To the Editor: The widespread and well‐reported Israeli enthusiasm for the re‐election of President Nixon is both simplistic and shortsighted.
ALONG ROUTE 555, South Vietnam, July 23—The war has moved inland from coastal Route 555—the road that was known to the French as the Street Without Joy—but it has left an aura of desolation unmatched anywhere in Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 23—American air raids over Hanoi reached a peak this weekend and, according to an official communique, left many dead and wounded throughout the city.
WASHINGTON, July 23—The American Civil Liberties Union, in a detailed report, has concluded that the response by Federal and local authorities to last year's May Day antiwar protests here amounted to “a profound blow to civil liberties” and a “suspension” of certain provisions of the Constitution.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 23’ (AP)—President and Mrs. Nguyen Van Thieu have announced the engagement of their 18‐year‐old daughter, Nguyen Thi Tuan Anh, to a son of the director‐general of the national airline, Air Vietnam. The hushand‐lti‐he is Nguyen Tan Trieu, whose older brother way married earlier this year Io a daughter Of Premier Tran Thien khiem. No wedding date was announced.
NEW DELHI, July 23 (AP)—The External Affairs Minister, Swaran Singh, said today that India and Poland had agreed to keep the 18‐year‐old international peace‐keeping commission in Indochina in operation, to be ready for use when fighting in the region ends.
STOCKHOLM, July 24 (UPI) — A Swedish journalist said today that he saw United States planes bomb civilian targets in North Vietnam Saturday.
WASHINGTON, July 24—The Senate, in a series of seesaw actions, adopted today an amendment requiring the withdrawal of American troops from Viettiam in exchange for release of prisoners of war, but then reversed itself by killing the over‐all bill.
CUSTER, S. D., July 24 —Senator George McGovern said today that as President he would not resume the bombing of North Vietnam even if there were difficulties in obtaining the release of prisoners of war after all United States forces had been withdrawn from Indochina.
SAIGON, Tuesday, July 25—Tamquan, a district capital in South Vietnam's central coast province of Binhdinh, has been recaptured by Saigon troops after two months of Communist occupation, an army spokesman reported yesterday.
PARIS, July 24 (AP)—Jane Fonda, who arrived here yesterday from a trip to Hanoi, said that President Nixon was a “traitor.” The American actress declared that a traitor was not someone who opposed the Vietnam war but rather “someone who is committing the most heinous crimes I think have ever been committed.”
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 24 — Secretary General Waldheim and Secretary of State William P. Rogers clashed today over charges that the United States bombing had intentionally damaged dikes in North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, July 24 (UPI) —James D. Hodgson, Secretary of Labor, said today that the Administration had found jobs or job training for at least 1.3 million Vietnam‐era veterans during the 12 months ending June 30.
WASHINGTON, July 24 Broad‐based but nonscientific polls taken in preparation for drafting the Republican national platform in Miami Beach next month indicate that crime, drugs, inflation, welfare and Federal spending are among the most urgent issues facing Americans.
WASHINGTON, July 24 (AP)—The following is the 50‐to‐45 roll‐call vote by which the Senate tonight adopted an amendment providing for the withdrawal of all American forces from Indochina within four months if American war prisoners are released:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, July 25 (AP) — South Vietnamese paratroops tried to storm the Citadel of Quangtri city yesterday but ran into withering enemy fire, according to reports from the scene, and at nightfall the outcome of the battle was said to be still in doubt.
What is probably the last round of the Paris peace talks prior to the American Presidential election now under way with the resumption of private meetings between Henry Kissinger and North Vietnamese Politburo member Le Duc Tho.
PHILADELPHIA, July 25 —The success of the acquisitions of the bulk Of RCA Corporation's computer operations at the end of 1971 has thus far exceeded the expectations of the Sperry Rand Corporation, J. Paul Lyet, chairman and chief executive officer told about 200 stockholders here today.
To the Editor: Hip! Hip! Hooray! for Gen. W. C. Westmoreland's patriotic pitch for the U.S. Army and, by implication, Vietnamization and vicarious victory (“A Soldier Looks Back,” Op‐Ed June 25). He bemoans the time when soldiering was a term implying that someone was slacking on the job. But now, because of the “enduring truths and principles” on which the military‐industrial complex is based, the Army is doing its proper job of bloodletting.
PARIS, July 25 — The United States delegation to the Vietnam talks here issued a sharp statement today charging that there has been “a significant build‐up” of North Vietnamese forces in the northernmost provinces of South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, July 25 —Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts has opened a discussion with the North Vietnamese Government over the question of American prisoners of war in Indochina.
In its response to Secretary General Waldheim's appeal not to bomb the dikes of North Vietnam, the United States Government has distorted and evaded the main issue.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, July 26—The South Vietnamese command said yesterday that its troops had recaptured the walled inner Citadel of Quangtri city and controlled the whole” provincial capital, but this morning a command spokesman indicated that there was still resistance within the Citadel.
WASHINGTON, July 25—The House Foreign Affairs Committee, once an ardent backer of the Vietnam war, voted today for legislation that would order a termination of American involvement in the war, subject only to a limited cease‐fire with North Vietnam and release of American prisoners.
AN LOC, South Vietnam Dear Papa and Mama:
Doctors treating Lyndon B. Johnson, who was hospitalized Monday night in San Antonio, Tex., after suffering chest pains and nausea, said “there is no evidence of a major severe heart attack.”
OKLAHOMA CITY, July 25—Lawyers for First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. accused the Army of fraud and demanded a new trial today on the ground of newly discovered evidence in the Mylai massacre case.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 25 (Agence France‐Presse)—American planes bombed Hanoi during the night in their first night raid against the capital since United States bombings were resumed last April.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 25 (UPI)—Three thousand United States troops ended their combat roles today, leaving a single battalion as the last American ground combat unit in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, July 26 Nothing better illustrates the change that is beginning to be felt in the traditionalist House of Representatives than the adoption of an end‐the‐war amendment by the Foreign Affairs Committee.
To the Editor: Surely I can't be the only person who thinks it is farcical to talk about the war ending in Vietnam while we're dropping an increasing tonnage or bombs on an unhappy country we are systematically destroying along with its inhabitants. We are meant to be distracted from this unending horror by Mr. Nixon's praiseworthy peace efforts in Russia and China. These are calculated moves.
WASHINGTON, July 26—The Administration said today that any damage done to the North Vietnamese dike system by American bombing was accidental and had only “the most incidental and minor im– pact” on the system.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, July 27 (AP)—At least 50 South Vietnamese marines were killed on July 11 in the worst recorded helicopter crash of the Vietnam war, the Saigon command acknowledged today for the first time.
To the Editor: The overwhelming yearning for peace that begot a McGovern bespeaks the highest aspirations of Americans for the good life. But the movement, already institutionalized, is in danger of death‐aborning by its vituperative indictment of those who held other views in other circumstances. This both short‐sighted and unjust.
PARIS, June 27—The 152d meeting of the Paris peace talks was held here today and Com munist and Western sources said that there had been no change from the positions the United States and North Viet nam took at secret talks eight days ago. 
MOSCOW, July 27—Former Attorney General Ramsey Clark has joined an international in quiry group that plans to leave Moscow by air for Hanoi tomor row to investigate the reports of United States bombings of dikes and towns in North Viet nam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 27 (AP)—American casual ties in the Vietnam war last week included 10 persons killed in action, one killed in non combat duty and 9 wounded, the United States command an nounced in its weekly sum mary today. Two men were listed as missing, presumably in an air crash. This compared with 8 killed in action the pre vious week, 5 other dead, 14 missing or captured and 26 wounded. 
WASHINGTON, July 27—The National Peace Action Coalition announced today that it would sponsor demonstrations in 13 cities in early August to protest American bombing of North Vietnamese dikes. 
WASHINGTON, July 27— President Nixon charged today that Secretary General Wald heim of the United Nations and other “well ‐ intentioned and naive people” had been “taken in” by Hanoi's propaganda into following a “double standard” of criticizing the United States war effort while ignoring North Vietnam's invasion of South Vietnam. 
President Nixon's biting attack on critics of his Indo china policy at his news conference yesterday is not likely to stem the rising tide of antiwar sentiment that found expression in both houses of Congress this week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, July 28 — Fire Base Bas togne, an important strong point defending the southwest approach to Hue, has been abandoned to North Vietnamese forces in the face of intense Communist shelling and ground attacks, a Saigon spokesman reported yesterday.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., July 28—Relations between the United States and Secretary General Waldheim grew more strained today as Mr. Wald heim, responding to criticism by President Nixon, called in George Bush, the United States representative.
WASHINGTON, July 28 (Reuters)—The Senate voted today for an amendment cut ting off Defense Department funds for any use of rain making or creation of forest fires as a weapon of war. 
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., July 28 (AP)—The last of six anti war veterans indicted on charges of conspiring to dis rupt the Republican National Convention with violence was freed today on $25,000 bond. Peter Mahoney, 25 years old, was released from the Leon County Jail after a representa tive of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War met the bond with funds he said came from private contributions. 
CUSTER, S. D., July 28— Senator George McGovern rode in a parade here today—not on a horse, despite his Western hat and suede jacket, but in a closed maroon‐and‐white Lin coln Continental. 
WASHINGTON, July 28 (AP) —The Defense Department to day announced that Capt. John A. Spires of the Army, husband of Mrs. Kay A. Spires, of Bath, N. Y., has been killed in action in Vietnam. He previously was listed as missing. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam,Sat urday, July 29—South Viet namese troops, after apparently suffering severe casualties, have pulled out of the inner wailed Citadel of the city of Quangtri on the northern front in the face of stubborn North Vietnamese resistance. 
WASHINGTON, July 28— The Administration today re leased a Government intel ligence report finding that American bombing had dam aged North Vietnam's dike sys tem at 12 points. But the report concluded that the hits were unintentional, their impact was minor “and no major dike has been breached.” 
Jane Fonda said yesterday that she appealed to American (pilots over the Hanoi radio to halt raids into North Vietnam and go home because she was so “horrified” by damage she said they caused. 
WASHINGTON, July 28— Following is the text of a re port distributed by the State Department today as a “con sensus” of the United States intelligence community on the issue of bombing of dikes in North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, July 28—The Senate Republican leadership, with little encouragement from the White House, was trying today to work out a compro mise end‐the‐war amendment that would satisfy some Senate doves and still be acceptable to the Administration. 
??
JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 28 (Reuters) — Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Adam Malik, said to day that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations meet ing in Manila July 13–14 had worked out a proposal to end the fighting in Indochina and that it had been submitted to all sides involved in the war. He added that the proposal con tained a compromise that would be acceptable to all sides. 
Harry McPherson was one of the best young men with Lyn don Johnson, humane, a liberal moderate, and intelligent — a Texas lawyer who reads liter ature and history for pleasure. His book therefore has a lot going for it, especially surprise. He worked loyally for Johnson for 13 years, assisting him in quelling the Senate Mends in the late fifties and writing his Vietnam speeches at the height of the war. His book therefore also has a lot going against it, especially, again, surprise. The author's skill is evident in his keeping the pleasure he gives offhand and catching the disap pointment he causes offguard. 
SAIGON. South Vietnam, July 29 — New tactics being employed by South Vietnamese and American aircraft have significantly reduced the threat from the enemy's small heat seeking missiles. which for a time curtailed air operations in some areas. 
WASHINGTON, July 29—In its first public evaluation of Senator George McGovern's program to end the Vietnam war, North Vietnam has said that “his position contains po sitive elements which would lead to a correct, peaceful set tlement of the Vietnam prob lem.” 
BONGSON, South Vietnam, July 26—The shops and houses are broken shells Many walls and roofs are missing. Living rooms are heaped with charred furni ture, twisted metal and shards of glass. 
WASHINGTON — The antiwar up surge in Congress came as something of a jolt for the Administration. Presi dent Nixon had seemed for so long to have the Vietnam issue so well un der control. Then, suddenly last week, he was under double‐barreled political attack. The message to him from Capi tol “Hill was: Get us out of the war or we'll do it for you. 
Quangtri was the only South Vietnamese provincial capital to fall to the North Vietnamese in the offensive they launched March 30. Its fall was a major propaganda victory for the Communists. When the Saigon forces be gan a counter‐offensive a few weeks ago, recapture of Quangtri was a key objective.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 29 (Agence France Presse) — Ramsey Clark, for mer United States Attorney General, arrived here today from Moscow on a two‐week visit as guest of the North Vietnamese Government. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, July 30—South Viet namese marines fought bunker to bunker yesterday in an advance toward Quangtri's Citadel. 
TULSA, Okla., July 29 (AP) —Charles Dean Gruver, the key “missing witness” in efforts to win a new court‐martial for First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., was arrested by the Tulsa police today on a warrant charging him with perjury. 
INGLEWOOD, Calif., July 29—Margaret Haugen is a clerk in a paint store, the mother of six grown children, and a registered Democrat who voted for Senator Hu bert H. Humphrey in the California primary last month. But she is not sure whom she will support for President in November. 
MILWAUKEE, July 29—Plans for a nationwide automobile convoy to take demonstrators to the Republican National Con vention in Miami Beach next month have been announced by the national steering com mittee of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War. 
To the Editor:
President Nixon's return last week to the tired theme that his war critics are “naive” dupes of Hanoi indicates a desire to pose campaign debate over the nation's de fense posture in terms as irrelevant and unilluminating as were the arguments over the missile gap and the future of Quemoy and Matsu in earlier election dialogues. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 30 (Agence France‐Presse) — One American plane was shot down and one pilot was taken prisoner during a raid on Hanoi today it was announced over the city's air‐raid warning loud speaker system.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Mon day, July 31 (AP)—United States planes have shot down two MIG‐21 interceptors northeast of Hanoi, American pilots re ported yesterday. 
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, May 31 (Reuters)—John Paul Vann, the senior United States ad viser to Military Region II, told newsmen here that a group of 100 North Vietnamese made contact by radio today with Government positions in Kon turn and said they wanted to defect.
WASHINGTON, May 31 (AP) —The Defense Department an nounced today the names of men killed in action in Indo china. Among the Army dead was Specialist 4 David A. Bausch, of Towaco, N. J.
WASHINGTON, May 31— Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, commander of United States forces in South Vietnam, will be nominated as the Army's new Chief of Staff “within a few days” of President Nixon's re turn from his European summit trip tomorrow night, well placed Army sources said to day.
WASHINGTON — There seems no room now for sympathy on either side of the partisan debate over the block ade of North Vietnam. But at some point, this decision should also be seen as personal tragedy for the men who made it—Henry Kissinger and Richard Nixon.
HUE, South Vietnam, May 31 (AP) — President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam, who flew into Kontum yesterday, spent the day today in Hue to bolster the morale of troops holding the defense line on the southern edge of enemy‐occu pied Quangtri Province.
Pressmen at The New York Times delayed the start of the first‐edition press run of yes terday's issue for nearly 15 minutes to protest the contents of a paid advertisement seek ing the impeachment of Presi dent Nixon.
WASHINGTON, May 31 — Joan Baez, the folk singer, and more than 30 other women gathered on the east steps of the Capitol this afternoon to announce plans for a “ring around the Congress” antiwar demonstration June 22.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, June 1 (AP)—South Vietnamese troops, heavily sup ported by helicopter gunship and fighter‐bomber attacks, re portedly reoccupied some lost ground in the Central Highlands city of Kontum yesterday.
BOSTON, May 31 (UPI) Five rabbis who joined in an antiwar demonstration May 17 at the JFK Federal Building were given suspended sentences today by a judge who told them that a condition of their six‐month probation was to avoid any similar activities. Each also was fined $50 for at tempting to block the entrance to the downtown building.
For more than two years the Senate has debated various amendments to end the war in Vietnam, to cut off funds for it, withdraw troops, etc. None of these amendments has had any effect, except to prevent the Sen ate from acting on other bills before it.
LAIKHE, South Vietnam, May 31—Sgt. 1st. Cl. Jesse Yearta and a dozen other American advisers living in bunkers under the surround ed town of Anloc formed a betting pool weeks ago on when a Government relief column would push through to break the siege, now 55 days old, and enable the thousands of wounded Viet namese soldiers there to get out. No one has won.
CHINHAN, South Vietnam, May 27 — Lieutenant Minh, the commander of a company of 100 men posted on the lonely front lines of South Vietnam's Orthern defenses, says: “The war will never end because the Americans need it for the support of their industries.”
HONG KONG, Friday, June 2 (Reuters)—The North Vietnamese press agency reported today that three American planes were shot down yesterday over the North Vietnamese provinces of Langson, Vinhphu and Yenbai. The fate of the fliers was not disclosed.
To the Editor: The doves have long been unhappy about the work of the Central Intelligence Agency in fomenting and directing secret wars in Laos and other countries. Now it becomes clear that. our military was caught by surprise in finding that North Vietnam brought a large number of tanks down the Ho Chi Minh Trail and prepared for large—scale attacks across the DMZ and at Anloc.
WASHINGTON, June 1—Two leading Republicans publicly congratulated the pressmen of The New York Times today for their protest against a twopage advertisement, published in, The Times yesterday calling for the impeachment of President Nixon.
WASHINGTON, June 1—President Nixon returned to Washington tonight from his twoweek tour of four nations and told a joint session of Congress that his trip to Moscow had laid the basis for “a new relationship between the two most powerful nations on earth.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 2 — The United States command announced yesterday that during the previous 24 hours B‐52 bombers had made heavy raids in the northernmost provinces of South Vietnam and in the Central Highlands, apparently in an effort to reduce the continuing threat to the cities of Hue and Kontum.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, June 3—The United States command reported yesterday that American warplanes, using “smart” bombs guided by laser light beams or television cameras, had damaged a power plant near Hanoi described as “a major source of electrical power to war‐related industries in the area.”
To the Editor: Because of a psychological blunder, the United States proceeded to lose the Korean War after it had won resounding victory there. North Korea had invaded South Korea and had seized perhaps 90 per cent of the territory of South Korea, United States forces having been compressed into small area in the southwestern corner of South Korea surrounding Pusan.
President Nixon was justifiably jubilant when addressed Congress immediately upon his return from Moscow, Teheran and Warsaw. His negotiations with Leonid I. Brezhnev and his earlier negotiations with Mao Tse‐tung and Chou En‐lai are changing the political geography of the world. There is good warrant for his hope that they have “begun to free us from perpetual confrontation.” Trouble spots and potential dangers remain—notably in Vietnam and the Middle East—and so do areas of intense ideological and political competition. But their menace is more than counterweighed by the promise of the new equilibrium and the new alignment now in the formative stage.
I recently went to Hue to see the damage caused by the new fighting. Before it began doctors at.the hospital. there estimated it would take thirty years after the fighting stopped to take care, of the war's innocent victims. Now it most certainly was worse —sudden rocketing followed by heavy bombing in populated areas.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, June 3 (AP)—A huge United States Air Force rescue armada plucked a downed airman from deep behind enemy lines northwest of Hanoi yesterday, spokesmen disclosed today.
President Nixon's special consultant on labor affairs personally delivered the President's thanks last night to pressmen who in against publication n The New York Times of a paid two‐page advertisement seeking Mr. Nixon's impeachment.
LONDON, June 2—In the opinion of well‐informed diplomats in the Far East, the Premier of North Vietnam, Pham Van Dong, was out of his country for at least four days during the Moscow summit meeting:. May 23 through 26. The general guess is that he was in China, but it is only a guess.
WASHINGTON, June 2 —Nearly 100 protesters gathered on a White House sidewalk this afternoon as an antiwar vigil there began its second year.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 2—The South Vietnamese Senate today rejected a request by President Nguyen Van Thieu for legislative authority to rule by decree for six months because of the Communist offensive.
WASHINGTON, June 2—After a meeting between President Nixon and the Congressional leaders, the White House said today that it expected prompt consideration and eventual approval by Congress of the strategic arms limitation agreements signed in Moscow last week.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y. June 3 — Despite intensified fighting in Southeast Asia, the Mekong Delta Development Project reports progress in its efforts to develop the water fesources of the lower Mekong basin which includes parts of Thailand, Cambodia, Laos and South Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, June 3(Agence France‐Presse) —The. Hanoi party daily, Nhan Dan, in a comment on President Nixon's “East and West journey” said today that “running about and knocking on any door at random will not sea:ire anything.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 3 (UPI)—President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered another military command shuffle today, naming a new chief for the remnants of the 3d Infantry Division, which was driven out of Quang Tri province May 1.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 4—Heavy monsoon rain drenched much of South Vietnam yesterday, and the sporadic clashes characteristic of the fighting during the last few weeks were mired in mud.
“Old Scruffy” is the name sometimes applied to him by the soldiers he commands in Vietnam, but any day now, Gen. Creighton Williams Abrams, 58, is expected to be named the Army's new Chief of Staff, succeeding Gen. William C. Westmoreland whose four‐year tour of duty ends June 30. A dashing World War II tank commander, General Abrams has had a more frustrating role in Vietnam the past four years. As American troops have been withdrawn, he has presided over the Vietnamization program sponsored by President Nixon. And he has carried out the task despite rising criticism of the war and setbacks on the battlefield. “It's too bad,” said one of his officers,” Abrams is very good. He deserves a better war.” Last week there were signs in Washington that the promotion would be controversial. “Look,” said one Pentagon general, “he's a great guy but... he's not going to shake the boat and it really needs shaking right now.”
WASHINGTON, June 3—The Army's secret report on the MYlai 4 massaere conciuded that the two top generals of the America Division committed a total of 43 specific acts of misconduct or omission in connection with the initial field investigations of the, atrocity.
SAIGON South Vietnam June 3 (UPI)—An American pilot plucked chives from a garden and tapped a banana tree for water during a 23day struggle for survival behind enemy lines in North Vietnam. Capt. Roger C. Locher described his ordeal today by telephone from his base in Thailand, where he was taken following his rescue.
WASHINGTON—For a man Who believes in capping his diplomatic dramas abroad with ceremonial climaxes at home, Thursday night may well linger in Richard Nixon's Mind some of the most satisfying theater of his Administration.
SAIGON—“Three months ago,” an American official here said last week, “we were virtually out of the refugee business. The next thing we knew there were refugees all over the place.” By the weekend, American officials were estimating that nearly 800,000 South Vietnamese had been driven from their homes since the North Vietnamese offensive began more than two months ago.
Jun 3—South Vietnam is in the throes of its worst recession in memory, and its Miniater of the Economy among others believes that there may be street rioting and political up beivals if quick solutions are not found for the problem of urban unemployment
THROUGH the binoculars on the signal bridge one discerns specks of people walking along a beach littered with sampans and hootches. Beyond the beach rise green paddy fields and woods fading rapidly into a distant skyline of blue peaks and haze. Occasionally one also sees white or black puffs of smoke hovering gently on the horizon, but for the most part the view of Quangtri, the first South Vietnamese province to fall entirely to the North Vietnamese in the current offensive, appears deceptively tranquil and calm.
ALBANY, June 3—A bill providing educational assistance to children of prisoners of war in North Vietnam has been signed by Governor Rockefeller.

PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sunday, June 4 (Reuters)—North Vietnamese troops today launched a heavy ground attack on a Cambodian outpost close to a strategic supply line into South Vietnam's delta region, the military command reported.
LEBANON, N. H., June 3 (AP) — Twenty‐nine persons were convicted yesterday on charges arising from a May 15 antiwar demonstration in which they sat down in front of a Selective Service bus. Each was fined $100.
Following are excerpts from Chapter 12, “Findings and Recommendations,” of the summary volume of the official report of the Department of the Army review of the preliminary investigations into the Mylai incident:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Anie 3 (UPI)—An American adviser who spent 53 days in Anloc said that North Vietnamese soldiers had massacred women and children a church service and bombarded a clearly marked hospital in the besieged city.
To the Editor:
LONDON, June 4—The success of the Moscow summit is a particular triumph for Henry Kissinger's” world view. He has argued that great powers can balance their mutual interests on a planetary scale, transcending local or ideological differences. In Moscow as in Peking President Nixon boldly followed that approach.
WASHINGTON, June 4—The Army's official secret report on the Mylai massacre has revealed that a second massacre, involving the killing of as many as 90 civilians, “did in fact” take place less than two miles from the hamlet of Mylai 4 on the same morning March 16, 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, IMonday, ‘June 5 — North Vietnamese troops attacked a district capital in populous Binhdinh Province on the central coast yesterday, according to Deports from the field.
HONG KONG, Monday June 5 (Reuters)—North Vietnam said today that the United States had dropped more mines in North Vietnamese harbors,’
LOS ANGELES, June 4—Senator Hubert H. Humphrey and Senator George McGovern held fast tonight to their sharply different positions on handling the prisoner of war issue in the closeout of American involvement in Vietnam.
The Rev Daniel J. Berrigan, outspoken opponent of the Vietnam war walked out of a mass for peace yesterday in St. Patrick's Cathedral and held his own prayer service on the church steps. He charged that he had been denied the opportunity to preach.
Subdued dignity appears to be the mood of Commencement 1972. With a few exceptions immediately after the mining of Haiphong, the campuses have remained quiet. Antiwar protest expresses itself in urgent but nonviolent pleading, with students joined in their appeal by powerful voices among university presidents. Symbolic of the new mood was the polite arrest during a protest demonstration last month of John William Ward, president of Amherst College.
When the Army first announced partial findings its investigation into the Mylai massacres two years ago, this newspaper joined many others in applauding “the remarkable vigor and candor” exhibited by the panel of inquiry headed by Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 5 (UPI)—The United States military command said today that American troop strength in Vietnam dropped to 63,700 last week, the lowest level in seven years, but still short of President. Nixon's goal of 49,000 by the end of the month. The troop level represented a drop of 1,100 men from the previous week, including 510 men in eight units that were deactivated. It was the largest weekly troop pullout in four weeks, the command said.
Senator Humphrey's endorsement of a $12.5‐billion defense budget cut and Senator McGovern's proposal for a $30‐billion reduction make it certain that the Administration's military spending plans will be a major issue in the Presidential campaign. That is as it should be. The historic agreements just reached in the first‐stage strategic arms limitation talks (SALT) with Moscow are unlikely to pare American military outlays very much, if at all. SALT II ultimately may reduce nuclear forces. But SALT I, unprecedented as its results are, will merely freeze them at more or less present levels.
NORFOLK, Va., June 5 (AP)—The aircraft carrier America sailed today for Vietnam after the Coast Guard cleared the way of antiwar protesters so the big ship could move from her Norfolk Naval Station pier to an ammunition ‐loading anchorage.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, June 6 — The relative lull in the Vietnam war persisted yesterday as skirmishes and shelling incidents were reported from various parts of the country.
WASHINGTON, June 5—Secretary of Defense MelVin R. Laird told Congress today that the expanded military activity in Vietnam could add $3‐billion to $5‐billion to the defense budget in the corning fiscal year, virtually doubling the projected annual cost of the war.
STOCKHOLM, June 6—The concept that countries have new international responsibilities toward each other for actions affecting the environment received strong support today as the United Nations environmental conference got down to its first full day of business.
ABOARD U.S.S. NEWPORT NEWS, off North Vietnam, June 2—Seaman Walter Olivier is embarrassed that his shipmates call him killer. A slight boyish sailor With a :shock of blond hair that falls in his eyes, Seaman Olivier ‘pulls the small brass trigger that fires this ship's huge, computer‐aimed 8‐inch guns. the heaviest afloat, in any navy.
WASHINGTON, June 6—The State Department today said that it was “deeply ‘disturbed” that Premier Olof Palme had enterjected the Vietnam issue “which we consider extraneous” at the United Nations conference.
SAIGON, Wednesday, June 7 (AP)—United States officials said yesterday that the North Vietnamese, with their harbors mined, their two railways to China cut and much of their highway system severed, were turning more to small craft and barges to move supplies.
To the Editor: The Princeton Institute for Defense Analyses has become the object of political action by a number of persons for a number of reasons, which, as reported by you, are centered on their opposition to President Nixon's conduct of the Vietnam war.
PHILADELPHIA—On May 4, I visited Mylai 2, the camp where most of the survivors of the 1968 massacre have been coralled for the past few years: I was accompanied by several Vietnamese‐speaking American staff members from the Quaker Rehabilitation Center, which is located in QuangngarCity four miles away.
About a third of, the 103 women in the Finch College graduating: class and a larger proportion of, :the faculty wore peace arm bands at commencement yesterday “to protest the fact that the speaker is a member of the Nixon Admistration,” as several simians put it,
PARIS — The world view of the United.: States would seem to have been.. ,decidedly refurbished by recent events: President Nixon's China trip, the successful riposte to the Vietnam Communists’ offensive including Moscow's acceptance of the American blockade, and the Nixon‐Brezhnev dialogue with its move toward halting the arms race.
To the Editor: Reading an Op‐Ed article in your newspaper of May 27 by Fred Lovgren, national coordinator of the Student Mobilization Committee and coordinator of the National Peace Action Coalition, I am moved to ask a few questions to which I don't really expect answers:
WASHINGTON — President Nixon's journey to Moscow provides an excellent prism through which to’ view recent demands by Democratic hopefuls for a’ precipitous withdrawal from Vietnam. Their broadly publicized notion that we can simply pack up and pull out with a claim that we have done “all that could be expected” harkens back to the unusual ethical proposition advanced by Pilate who thought he could cleanse his conscience by washing his hands.
Dr. William J. McGill, president of Columiyia University, called yesterday for an immediate end to American involvement in the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, June 7—The South Vietnamese command said today that its forces had driven out all but a handful of the remaining enemy troops in the city of Kontum in the Central Highlands and that 200 enemy troops were killdd in six clashes in the area yesterday.
PEKING, June 6 — Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the exiled Cambodian leader, said in an interview here today that he was unalterably opposed to any Geneva‐style conference to end the Indochina war.
Wars are photographed in the faces of men, dead or aliVe, Mice no one can take a picture of a flying bullet.. Larry Burrows, a 44‐year‐Old Briton who was a Life photograpker, used to say that. And in the nine years he covered the war in Vietnam—going back again and again to be in it—he never stopped looking at these faces.
To the Editor:
COLORADO SPRINGS, June 7 (UPI)—Air Force Secretary Robert C. Seamans told graduates at the Air Force Academy exercises here that, while “winds of peace are stirring” as America ends its involvement in Vietnam, it would be “extreme folly” to reduce American military force.
BANGKOK, Thailand, June 7 —The United States has increased its armed forces contingent here from 32,000 men a few months ago to 40,000. Most of the increase results from strengthening of the Air Force contingents at six Thai bases to counter the Communist offensive by bombing in South and North, Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, June 8—A Saigon command spokesman reported this morning that an advance element of the South Vietnamese relief column that has been trying for two months to break through to surrounded Anloc “shook hands” yesterday afternoon with a rear element of the government garrison there.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, June 7 (UPI) —George W. Ball in a memo randum dated Oct. 5, 1964, when he was Under Secretary, of State, urged a negotiated settlement in Vietnam and warned the Johnson Administration against intensifying the war.
LOS ANGELES, June 7—Senator George McGovern promised today that if elected President he would go to Hanoi or Paris, if necessary, to negotiate an end to the Vietnam war and a release of American prisoners.
CHONTHANH, Sout Vietnam, June 7 (UPI)—A Columbia Broadcasting System cameraman was wounded by a mortar fragment today while covering the fighting south of Anloc. Vo Thanh Son, 42 years old, a Vietnamese, was struck in the leg.
STOCKHOLM, June 7 — In the first harsh exchange of the United Nations environmental conference, the United States rebuked Sweden tonight for injecting a denunicatibn of “ecocide” into the conference proceedings,
A heavy favorite even before she begins pounding the pavements here, Senator George Mc Govern will open his campaign for New York's 278 Democratic National Convention delegates, the largest state bloc, tomorrow.
MOSCOW, June 8—Soviet television viewers were told tonight that President. Nixon had sought the Soviet‐American arms agreements partly because of election‐year tactics, but that the significance was that American politics now required detente with Moscow rather than the anti‐Communism of past campaigns.
WASHINGTON, June 8 — An admiral, and an Air Force general presented favorable assessments of the air war over. North Vietnam today and acknowledged that fewer targets are considered off limits than in past campaigns.
PHILADELPHIA, June 8 —The Southern Baptist Convention rejected a resolution today calling on its 11.8‐million members to support both conscientious objection to war and conscientious participation in war — a willingness to serve only in wars that one regards just.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 8 (UPI)—Eleven Americans were killed and 20 wounded in combat last week, the United States command said today.
WASHINGTON, June 8 —Two high‐ranking military officials denied today that the North Vietnamese dikes had been targets of the bombing campaign.
PARIS, June 8—North Vietnam charged today that the United States had been intentionally and heavily bombing its dikes, an action that could provoke major floods in its most populous rural areas.
TRANGBANG, South Vietnam, June 8 — Standing in the company command post here today, Sgt. Nguyen Van Hai watched incredulously as a South Vietnamese plane mistakenly dropped flaming napalm right on his troops and a cluster of civilians.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 8 — Long‐range ground reconnaissance patrols in North Vietnam and Communist‐held areas of Laos, and Cambodia are being resumed tinder United States direction after hiding been suspended three and;;a half years ago, informed sources said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 9—For the ‘first time in nearly seven weeks, United States B‐52's have bombed North Vietnam, the American command in Saigon has announced.
To the Editor:
Those who feel that American foreign policy since the end of World War II, especially as it reveals itself in Vietnam, is signal success will not much enjoy Richard Barnet's critical investigation of who is making that policy and how it is done. For it is his thesis that there has been great shift of responsibility in the functioning of our government, and that the wrong men, the military, are looking after matters that should be the concern of the civilian arm. He is not interested in locating individual culprits. In his opinion it is the system that is to blame, if it allows one agency of government to dominate the thinking of others to the point, he maintains, that frequently no other alternatives are considered. The time has come, he believes, when we should scrutinize the results of that influence with a more critical eye, and this book his contribution to that scrutiny.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia (UPI) —Communist forces hit Pnompenh and the provincial capital of Ta Khmau, eight miles to the south, with a barrage of rockets early today. North Vietnamese troops followed up the rocket attack with a ground assault on Ta Khmau.
Backing up his irritation over Representative Ogden Reid's defection to the Democrats, Governor Rockefeller is trying to raise a $100,000 campaign fund for Mr. Reid's probable Republican opponent, Westchester District Attorney Carl A. Vergari.
WASHINGTON, June 9 —United Statet military leaders are being permitted to wage the air war as they want in Indochina—sealing off North Vietnam's coast and harbors with mines, followed by the systematic and relatively unre stricted destruction of military and industrial targets through out the country.
To the Editor: There is an ominous and generalized silence about our military actions in Vietnam. Not that one fears the Viet namese are going to invade California; but one has to know that our Govern ment is blowing women and children to pieces every day of the week and not saying anything about it.
In a war largely without he toes, John Paul Vann was one of the few men in South Viet nam whose career approached legend.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, June 10 — John Paul Vann, a senior American ad viser and one of the most expe rienced United States officials ever stationed in South Viet mum, was killed in a helicopter crash last night.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 9 (AP)— A cameraman for the South Vietnamese na tional television network was killed yesterday while filming fighting near the Mychanh de fense line north of Hue.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, June 10—The South Vietnamese Army reported yes terday that one of its units, stalled for weeks while trying to break through to besieged Anloc only one mile away, had finally succeeded in reaching the town.
To the Editor: This letter on the grave and tragic events in Vietnam is written on be half of Labor Action for Peace, which is sponsored by eighty British Mem bers of Parliament, by union leaders, clergy and others.
WASHINGTON, June 9 —Ronald L. Ziegler, White House press secretary, read a tribute to Mr. Vann in President Nixon's behalf today, It said:
WASHINGTON, June 9—President Nixon has nearly doubled Air Force fighter bomber strength in Southeast Asia and tripled the number of aircraft carriers, and he is, quadrupling the force of 3‐52 Stratofortresses there.
Mr. Proxmire. Mr. President, on Monday, May 15, Secretary of State William Rogers appeared before the Foreign Operations Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee. I have the honor to chair that sub committee.
Presidential adviser Henry Kissinger has repeatedly predicted that serious negotiations with Hanoi will re sume when the current Communist offensive in South Vietnam comes to an end. The offensive, after some spectacular gains, now appears to be slowing down with the beginning of heavy monsoon rains. The season for negotiations appears to be approaching again.
Representative Lester L. Wolff, chairman of a House foreign affairs subcommittee in vestigating international drug traffic, challenged yesterday an Administration assertion that it had made “real progress” in suppressing the flow of narcot ics out of South Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand.
STOCKHOLM, June 9 (AP)—The United States and China clashed tonight over the Viet nam war in a meeting held to discuss a draft declaration on environmental principles.
The children were at play last Thursday beside large pink pagoda on the edge of the town of Trangbang, 40 miles from Saigon. Some 150 yards away, North Vietnamese soldiers were entrenched in the town's marketplace. Two single‐engine, propellerdriven Skyraiders of the South Vietnamese air force began dropping bombs on the enemy, and some the bombs fell near the pagoda. The children ran down a. road.
To the Editor: As citizens, as parents and as educators, we declare our opposition to the further prolongation of the war in Vietnam. Troubled by what this war has done to our society and to our children, we believe that to continue to destroy life and land in Indochina can only, turn us against ourselves.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 10 (UPI)—The Vietcong took credit today for the death of top United States adviser, John Paul Vann, in a helicopter crash and praised the good marksmanship of the ground crew which they said shot down the copter.
BENTRE, South Vietnam, June 10 (UPI)—A Saigon financier hopes to be operating the first fo a series of freezing plants shipping South Vietnamese frozen shrimp to the United States by the end of the year, according to an Ameri can source.
WASHINGTON, June 10 (UPI) — Representative Lester L. Wolff, Democrat of Nassau, has introduced a bill designed to prohibit President Nixon from using a nuclear bomb in Southeast Asia without specific approval of Congress.
STOCKHOLM, June 10—China today denounced the United States and other “imperialistic superpowers” as being primarily responsible for global environmental problems, and demanded “compensation” for the underdeveloped countries.
WASHINGTON, June 10—Senator Mike Mansfield, the Democratic leader, commended President Nixon today for leading the nation out of “the murky detours of the cold war” in the direction of world peace.
WASHINGTON, June 10—Gen. John D. Lavelle was relieved as commander of United States Air Force units in Southeast Asia in March and demoted after ordering repeated and unauthorized bombing attacks of military targets in North Vietnam.
It was a year ago, on a Sunday, that The New York Times began printing a series it called, with an agonizingly demure attempt to avoid sensationalism, “Vietnam Archive.” Nobody paid any attention.
WASHINGTON, June 10 —President Nixon told Senate leaders today that the cuts proposed by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in the military aid program would have a “destablizing effect” on the nation's allies and on world peace efforts.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 10—South Vietnam's lower house today refused to override the Senate and grant President Nguyen Van Thieu authority to rule by decree for six months.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 10 (AP)— A chartered Chinese Nationalist transport plane carrying United States and South Vietnamese soldiers normally engaged in clandestine operations crashed into a mountain in the Central Highlands a week ago.
To many, John Paul Vann was a living symbol of the American involvement in Vietnam. He began his career there as a lieutenant colonel in 1962, just as the American buildup was starting. Soon he was in the thick of controversy. An unorthodox tactician, he challenged conventional military Ideas drawn from World War II and Korea. He vehemently criticized and exposed corruption Vietnamese high places. To make matters worse, he frequently aired his views news correspondents. His constant battles with the military hierarchy forced retirement from the army in 1963, but he was soon back in Vietnam as a State Department civilian adviser. It was in this role, working in the strategic Central Highlands area as the latest North Vietnamese offensive got under way that Mr. Vann found new prominence. And it was there last Friday night that he met death—at the age of 47, in a flaming helicopter crash, while flying from one danger spot to another to check on the action.
PEKING—If there are any regrets in Peking about President Nixon's visit to the Chinese People's Republic last February, they are not apparent either to the casual observer or to the informed diplomat in this capital. Nor are there any signs that the President's trip to Moscow two weeks ago has caused Peking to reevaluate its position vis‐à‐vis the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 11— United States 11‐52's flew 12 missions in the southern panhandle of North Vietnam between noon Friday and 6 A.M. today, as the heaviest aerial bombardment missions of the war continued to be directed against North Vietnamese supply caches and depots near Donghoi.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 10 (AP)—Nine‐year‐old Phan Thi Kim‐Phuc is recuperating in a Saigon children's hospital, the unintended victim of a misdirected napalm attack.
To the Editor: If President Nixon's policies on Vietnam are of such overriding importance and so out of step with majority public opinion, we will find out soon enough through the direct democratic procedure of national elections. With that election only five months away, it is both superfluous and arrogant for any group, no matter how well endowed with education, titles or self‐righteousneis, to begin organizing impeachment proceedings against president Nixon.
A Newsweek Magazine correspondent who spent four years covering the Vietnam war has charged that American forces killed thousands of civilians in the Mekong Delta under the guise of “pacification.”
To the Editor: Roger Morris's “The Ultimate Betrayal” reveals that a man who can handle words well may yet fail to grasp the realities he purports to describe.
The military component of foreign aid is again becoming a lightning rod for Congressional discontent with major elements of President Nixon's foreign policy —particularly in South and Southeast Asia.

MIDDLETOWN TOWNSHIP, N. J., June 11 (AP)—Fifty‐two antiwar protesters were arrested today by about 30 Marines after failing to heed orders to end a blockade of railroad tracks leading into the Naval, Ammunition Depot at Earle, according to a spokesman for the military.
WASHINGTON, June 11—An antiwar group has named 12 hawkish Congressmen as its “deadly dozen,” while an ecology group has cited 12 House members as its “dirty dozen,” and both are organizing to defeat the Representatives on their lists.
DATDO, South Vietnam. June 11—Poking through the bombed‐out ruins of his home’ and store today, Cao Van Lien’ found only a photograph of President Nguyen Van Thieu left undamaged by the twoweek battle for this devasted district town.
Representative Otis G. Pike, Democrat of New York, yesterday accused the Air Force of “trying to sweep a scandal under the rug” by withholding information from Congress on the dismissal three months ago of Gen. John D. Lavelle as commander of the Seventh Air Force in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, June 11 —As the North Vietnamese offensive has seemed to lose momentum in recent weeks, there have inevitably been assertions that it was costly failure and even that South Vietnam can look with some confidence toward a secure future, Some such assessments come from senior, experienced and gifted military officers. But there are other opinions from men who also merit great respect.
LONDON, June 11—Several weeks ago in this space there was a report from the North Vietnamese village of Phucloc. It described the damage done when, as the villagers and North Vietnamese officials said, American planes bombed Phucloc at 2:20 on the morning of April 16. They said that of the population of 611, 63 were killed and 61 injured.
Emperor Hirohito of Japan received an invitation to the United States from President Nixon through his envoy, Henry A, Kissinger. Mr. Kissinger, ending a three‐day visit to Tokyo, did not say when the visit would be, but Japanese officials indicated it would take place after the Presidential election here.
WASHINGTON, June 12 —The State Department said today that “no signal” of any kind had been received from Hanoi to suggest that North Vietnam was ready to resume the Paris talks on what the United States considered “serious and constructive” basis.
WASHINGTON—More than a year ago, President Nixon told Republicans that the Vietnam war would not be an issue for Democrats in the 1972 campaign. The broad and highly effective progress of Vietnamization and the successful pace of United States troop withdrawals have given every indication of bearing out the President's appraisal. However, after the massive invasion of South Vietnam by twelve North Vietnamese divisions and the actions taken to repel that invasion, some have questioned whether the President's prediction requires reassessment. It does not.
WASHINGTON, June 12 —John D. Lavelle acknowledged today that he was dismissed in March as commander Air Force units in Southeast after ordering his planes make “in the neighborhood” 20 unauthorized raids on military targets in North Vietnam and reporting them as “protective‐reaction” missions.
WALL TOWNSHIP, N. J. June 12 (AP)—Antiwar activists ended their attempt to block the seaward approach to the Earle Naval Ammunition Depot here today, but promised to return next weekend. The demonstrators manned 13 canoes that stayed just outside a security channel about 750 yards off the piers used by the Navy to load munitions. Five Coast Guard vessels prevented the canoes from going into the area.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, June 12—American psychological‐warfare efforts in Vietnam, centralized for the last seven years in a single large agency here, are being rapidly closed out or dispersed, mainly to duce public reminders of United States role in the war. The Joint United States Public Affairs Office has vacated the large building near Saigon's City Hall that has been a downtown symbol of the American presence since the mid‐nineteen‐fities.
WASHINGTON, June 12—A survey of reliable and experienced military sources in Vietnam by Charles Mohr of The New York Times convinced him that only the enormous use of American air power... had prevented a South Vietnamese collapse early in April.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 12 (AP) — The United States command announced today that American troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 1,800 men last week, to 61,900.
STOCKHOLM, June 12—A call for a halt to all testing nuclear weapons, denounced as a source of global pollution, was overwhelmingly approved at the United Nations environmental conference here today. The vote, on the resolution was 48 to 2, with 14 nations abstaining, among them two nuclear powers, the United States and Britain.
PARIS, June 12—William J. Porter, chief American negotiator at the Vietnam peace talks, returned here today after almost a month's absence and announced renewed interest in resuming the stalled negotiations.
WASHINGTON, June 12 —Senior administration officials said today that computers and other navigational and bombing control systems made it unlikely that United States aircraft attacking North Vietnam would accidentally, stray over Chinese territory.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, June 13 (AP)—Thousands of refugees, mostly montagnard tribesmen, moved southward out of Anloc yesterday as the North Vietnamese grip on the devastated provincial capital loosened after 67 days of siege.
PARIS—As the intensity of Vietnam fighting shows some signs of diminishing, there are indications that a serious negotiation May ‘soon resume.’
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 13—Do Xuan Lien, a cameraman for the Columbia Broadcasting System, was wounded today seconds after landing in a helicopter at the provincial capital of Anloc, 60 miles north of Saigon. C.B.S. said he was hit in the forehead by a chunk of shrapnel, helped back aboard the helicopter and flown to a military hospital outside Saigon, where he was treated and released.
PARIS, June 13—The Vietnamese Communist delegations to the peace talks asked the United States and South Vietnam today to resume negotiations.
WASHINGTON—The war in Vietnam has escalated. The voices of criticism in Washington have not..
WASHINGTON, June 13 (AP) —John Paul Vann, the senior American adviser in South Vietnam who was killed in a helicopter crash last week, will be buried Friday in Arlington National Cemetery.
LAIKHE, South Vietnam Wednesday, June 14—Large numbers of fresh South Vietnamese troops were flown into the Anloc area yesterday as an epic battle for the little provincial capital seemed to be nearing an end.
Representative John J. Rooney yesterday announced a $1.35million Federal grant to help develop a “vertical industrial park” that he said would create 500 ,to 600 jobs in Brooklyn.
WASHINGTON, June 13—The United States assured the Chinese today that its bombing of North Vietnam close to their border was in no way intended to threaten their security.
WASHINGTON, June 13—For most of his 32 years in the Air Force, John Daniel LaVelle managed to avoid the public eye, moving quietly and efficiently through a number of managerial jobs on his way to a four‐star general's assignment last year as commander of all Air Force units in Southeast Asia. The general has burst into prominence in the last few days with the disclosure that he had taken it upon himself to stretch the rules and order the ‘bombing of unauthorized targets in North Vietnam, later reporting the assaults as “protective reaction” strikes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, June 14 (AP) —North Vietnamese troops along Route 13 fired on a column of 1,000 civilians moving south out of Anloc yesterday, reportedly killing 5 to 10 and wounding 30 to 40.
WASHINGTON, June 13—The House Foreign Affairs Committee, by a one‐vote margin, today rejected end‐the‐war legislation proposed by Democrats and instead adopted Republican‐sponsored resolution endorsing President Nixon's policy in Vietnam.
The life and death of John Paul Vann, for years a nearlegendary military and civilian adviser in Vietnam, symbolized the idealistic hopes and tragic failure of the American intervention in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 13—The Government of the United States is saying some odd things to the American people these days, and the case of Gen. John D. Lavelle and his private war on North Vietnam is only the latest chapter in a very strange story.
WASHINGTON, June 13—The sergeant whose letter led to the dismissal of the top Air Force general in Vietnam charged that members of an American photo‐reconnaissance team had been ordered to falsify classified documents concerning air strikes over North Vietnam.
STOCKHOLM, June 13—Apart from shipments relating to the Vietnam war, the Soviet Union has become the largest supplier of weapons to third world countries, according to a comprehensive analysis of world armaments issued here today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 13—“The system is totally dependent on people being honest,” a colonel at the military headquarters here said today in reaction to Gen. John D. Lavelle's testimony in Washington that he ordered unauthorized strikes against North Vietnam last winter. No special measures have been taken, according to command spokesmen here, to prevent a recurrence of what General Lavelle said he did about 20 times between November and March.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 14 (UPI)—The Cambodian military command reported two Cambodians killed and 17 wounded in a sharp clash today with Communist forces 38 miles southeast of Pnompenh. The fighting occurred near Preyveng, a provincial capital that has been surrounded since soon after the start of the North Vietnamese offensive at the end of March. It was the first sizable battle in the area in more than a month.

WASHINGTON, June 14 —State Department officials said today that they did not believe it would be useful for the United States to resume the Vietnam peace talks In Paris at this time.
MOSCOW, June 14 — President Nikolai V. Podgorny left Moscow by air for Hanoi today, evidently to brief the North Vietnamese leaders on President Nixon's talks here last month.
CALCUTTA, India, June 14 (AP) — President Podgorny stopped over in Calcutta today on his way to Hanoi.
The case of Gen. John D. Lavelle, who was relieved of his command of United States Air Forces in Southeast Asia last March for exceeding his authority in ordering attacks against North Vietnam, raises the most serious questions about the effectiveness of civilian control over the American military.
PARIS, June 14 — The United States and South Vietnam refused today to resume the Vietnam peace talks this week, but left the door open for sessions later.
WASHINGTON, June 14—The House Armed Services Committee approved today the $1.3billion increase in the strategic weapons program that the Administration said was neces sary to maintain technological superiority over the Soviet Union.
The return to Paris of the American negotiator, Ambassador William Porter, and the prospective return of North Vietnam's delegation chief, Xuan Thuy, suggest the approach of another monsoon negotiating season. Now that a new military equilibrium has emerged on the ground and the weather is too soggy for decisive battles, both sides may be ready for some serious talking about a compromise settlement.

David Douglas Duncan, in the last 38 years, has photographed three American wars and much of the rest of the world in peace and in agony. Today his work becomes the subject of the first photographic exhibition in the 40‐year history of the Whitney Museum of American Art.
EAGLE NEST, N. M.—The little chapel with its curving, gull wings, rising on a hill in northern Mexico, makes some visitors uneasy. They do not seem to know how to behave inside it.
WASHINGTON, June. 14 —The Air Force has discovered a structural defect that may affect up to 40 per cent of its fleet of B‐52 strategic bombers and curtail their usefulness, according to Congressional testimony released today.
WASHINGTON, June 14 —A former photo‐intelligence specialist for the Seventh Air Force, in Vietnam said today that in 1970 his top‐secret unit planned, a number of bombing strikes into North Vietnam that a few days later were publicly described by the Air Force as “protective reaction.”
LONDON—The present invasion of South Vietnam and the intense fighting of the last few weeks draw attention once again to the human suffering caused, on an almost unprecedented scale, to the Vietnamese people by the continuing war. I am not here considering the battle casualties which, although on each side they have probably reached 500,000, can at least be regarded as “legitimate” in war.
SAIGON, Thursday, June 15 (AP) — The United States command reported yesterday that American air strikes severed the main rail line between Hanoi and Haiphong on Tuesday. This was accomplished, the command said, through the bombing of a rail and highway bridge at Haiduong, midway between the two cities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, June 15—With enemy ground fire greatly reduced, allied helicopters poured more South Vietnamese troops reinforcements yesterday into the besieged and devastated provincial capital of Anloc.
WASHINGTON, June 14—Henry A. Kissinger, the President's adviser on national security, will go to China next week for five days of talks with Premier Chou En‐lai and other officials on a variety of issues, presumably including Vietnam.
To the Editor: Norman F. Dacey's “Letter to the President” advertisement, June 6, should not be dismissed as a mere “political ad” in an election year. The charges made therein are too serious; they require full and frank discussion now from all points of view. Americans demand candor on everything pertaining to Vietnam. Why should there not be equal candor about the U.S. role in the Arab‐Israeli problem? Must this be soft‐pedaled until after the November elections—and then on into the indefinite future?
To the Editor: Referring to the advertisement in The Times of May 31, pages 22‐23, entitled “A Resolution to Impeach Richard M. Nixon as President of the United States,” I wish to inform you that neither Ronald Young nor I have given permission to use our names in the manner they were used, as members of the National Executive Committee. We had never been approached on that basis. If we had, we would have refused to give permission to use our names that way.
WASHINGTON, June 15—Ellsworth Bunker, the American Ambassador to Saigon, has reported to Washington that South Vietnam's civilian casualties in the current fighting are running far ahead of those in the 1968 Tet offensive.
DANANG, South Vietnam, June 15 — United States Air Force officers here said today that their planes stopped bombing the Hanoi area yesterday, beginning a four‐day pause that would last as long as President Nikolai V. Podgorny of the Soviet Union was there.
SAIGON, South Vietnam,’ June 15 — An airliner that took off from Bangkok today for a flight to Hong Kong crashed in South Vietnam's Central Highlands, apparently killing all 81 persons aboard.
WASHINGTON, June 15—The Defense Department said today that “there are no active investigations under way” within the military regarding unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 15—Three former members of a photo‐intelligence team assigned to Pacific Air Force headquarters in Hawaii said in an interview today that at least 20 to 25 planned bombing raids later described as “protectivereaction” strikes were flown each month by Air Force planes over North Vietnam throughout 1970 and 1971. This number would be more than three times the total of “protectivereaction” raids officially announced by the Pentagon.
WASHINGTON, June 15—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, left by plane tonight on his fourth journey to Peking.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, June 16 (AP)—The United States command reported today that of the 14 bridges bombed on Wednesday 9 were hit between the port cities. of Vinh and Donghoi.
WASHINGTON, June 15—The phrase “protective reaction” was first used on Oct. 9, 1969, by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, but the practice that it represents had been carried on for almost a year before that.
WASHINGTON, June 15 —The United Service Organizations acknowledged today that charges of currency manipulatioon, black‐market activities, mail order fraud and other corrupt practices by some of its employes at service clubs in South Vietnam had been substantiated.
PARIS, June 15 — France and the Soviet Union found themselves in broad agreement today on problems in Europe, the Middle East and Southeast Asia after a three‐day official visit by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko.
GROSSINGER, N, Y., June 15—A movement to revive within Reform Judaism some long‐ignored Jewish laws and disciplines was started here this week at the annual convention of the Central Conference of American Rabbis.
On this page today we publish a small selection from the several hundred letters The Times has received in protest against two advertisements that appeared in this newspaper on May 31 and June 6 respectively. The first of these advertisements, signed by a group of citizens calling themselves “The National Committee for Impeachment,” denounced President Nixon for continuing prosecute the war in Vietnam in alleged violation of law and the Constitution, and demanded his removal from office. The second of the two advertisements consisted an open letter to the President signed by one Norman Dacey, bitterly attacking Mr. Nixon for a Middle East policy in allegedly “blind support” of Israel.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 15 (UPI)—Six Americans were killed in combat last week, five fewer than the week before, the United States command reported today.
WASHINGTON, June 15 (AP) — Led by Senator Harold Hughes, Democrat of Iowa, a dozen members of Congress complained officially yesterday that the three major television networks had refused to sell them time to reply to President Nixon's position on the Vietnam war..
MOSCOW, June 15 — Soviet leaders acknowledged today that they had faced opposition in their decision to go ahead with the summit talks with President Nixon after the United States mined North Vietnam's ports last month.
To the Editor: Thank you for giving aid and comfort to the enemy by publishing “A Resolution to Impeach.
WASHINGTON, June 15—The Equal Opportunity Advisory Committee of the Agency for International Development has dissolved itself, accusing the agency of failing to adequately hire and promote minorities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 16—One of the last two major American combat units here is being deactivated to meet President Nixon's deadline for reducing United States troop strength in South Vietnam to 49,000 by the end of June.
WASHINGTON, June 16 (AP) —John Paul Vann, the most renowned United States adviser in the Vietnam war, today was given a hero's burial and the Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian award.
MOSCOW, June 16—The first suggestions emerged here today that the Soviet leadership might be engaged in a diplomatic effort to persuade North Vietnam to accept President Nixon's proposal for cease‐fire in place.
During a nationally televised debate last week just before the California primary, Mayor Sam Yorty of Los Angeles pointed to the other candidates for the Democratic party's Presidential nomination and proclaimed that he was “the only one on this panel who is wearing a P.O.W. bracelet.”
STOCKHOLM, June 16 —The United Nations environ.; mental conference ended tonight with the adoption of a much‐debated declaration of principles to serve as a guide for an international fight on pollution.
WASHINGTON, June 16 —Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican of Erie County and a former professional football quarterback, during his first year and a half in the House has become one of the more aggressive Congressional supporters of President Nixon. This week Mr. Kemp assailed one of his Republican colleagues, Representative Paul N. McCloskey Jr. of California, who ran against Mr. Nixon in some of the early Republican Presidential primaries.
SAIGON, Soulh Vietnam, Saturday, June 17—The United: States command reported yesterday that American planes struck at three MIG air bases and other North Vietnamese: targets Thursday in one of the heaviest days of bombing thus’ far.
SAIGON, June 16 (AP)—Wounded South Vietnamese troops were airlifted from Anloc today and two senior allied commanders who flew into the battered city came under enemy fire as they landed.
MONTREAT, N. C., June 16 —The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the U. S. (Southern) ended its annual meeting today after rejecting strong statements against American involvement in Vietnam.
PEKING, June 16—Premier Chou En‐lai forcefully reiterated tonight that the United States was involved in a war of aggression in Indochina and cited former President Dwight Eisenhower's conduct in the Korean war as a good example for Washington to follow in ending the Vietnam war.
We know, of course, that President Nixon does not have time to see the papers because he is entirely occupied in arranging for a generation of peace (sometime), in bringing the war in Vietnam to an end with honor (sometime) and in teaching the North Vietnamese respect for the American Presidency (right now, by flattening with bombs and naval shelling everything that moves or functions there). To avoid his being diverted from these tasks, he gets his news from public sources in capsule form prepared by a staff of expert analysts and summarizers.
The Vietnam war has generated so much dishonesty and moral blindness through three Administrations that the nation now appears to consider these normal. So there is no particular outcry over the disclosures that numerous “protective reaction” raids on North Vietnam have been staged, to let American fliers bomb what they wanted to bomb, when they wanted to bomb it.
WASHINGTON, June 17—Six months after their falling‐out over the war between India’ and Pakistan, the United States and India remain in a state of strained relations, mired in mutual suspicion and distrust.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., June 17 (AP)— Ten convicts who say they want to do something for their country have petitioned President Nixon offering to change places with 10 American prisoners of war in North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 18 (AP) — A series of explosions ripped through five fuel tanks shortly before dawn today at the United States Army's Vietnam headquarters 12 miles northeast of Saigon. First reports said there were no casualties.
HONG KONG, June 17 (Reuters)—The North Vietnam press agency said today that six United States warships were set ablaze by shelling from shore batteries between June 10 and 14.
ANN ARBOR, Mich., June 17 —About 30 persons were arrested here today and charged with malicious destruction of property following attempts by a crowd of about 500 to dig “symbollic bomb craters” in the lawn of the University of Michigan campus.
SAIGON—At one time, Binhlong province north of Saigon was a prosperous region heavily planted with neat rows of rubber trees and with flourishing towns strung out along its one real road.
PEKING—Premier Chou En‐lai has simple advice for the United States on how to end the Vietnam war: Bite the bullet.
PHUCUONG, South Vietnam, June 15— One afternoon during the North Vietnamese siege of Anloc an artillery shell killed eight people in the house to the left of where Vu Van Nam and his family were staying. The next morning another shell killed 12 people in the house on the right.
HONG KONG, June 17—North Vietnam projects abroad an image of a selfless, dedicated people and a valiant, unbeatable army, but in broadcasts intended only for home consumption there are hints of problems and pressures among the civilian population and the members of the armed forces.
WASHINGTON — The longing for some sort of peace in Vietnam has grown so strong, both in and out of the Nixon Administration, that the slightest hint of progress toward the evanescent goal instantly spurs eager speculation that a settlement may yet be within reach.
Two 14‐year‐old boys: I met the first in Hanoi, at the house used by the mission of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam. (Years ago, I discovered later, the house was the American Consulate‐General.) There I was introduced to three heroic liberation fighters from the South—a girl 22, a boy 17, and the 14‐year‐old.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Sunday, June 19—American planes continued heavy bombing of North Vietnam yesterday, and the United States command announced that it had begun deactivating the last major American combat unit in South Vietnam.
TOKYO, June 17 (AP)—Le Duc Tho, the chief adviser for North Vietnam's delegation to the Paris peace talks, arrived in Peking today on his way to Hanoi, Hsinhua, the Chinese news agency, reported.
YAROSLAVL, U.S.S.R., June 15—“I saw your President on TV,” a burly collective farmer said as he stood waistdeep in a murky, motionless pond beside his modest peasant home. “He looks like a Russian. It is good that he came.”
WASHINGTON — “Dear Senator Hughes,” the letter began, “I and other members of wing intelligence... have been falsifying classified reports for missions into North Vietnam. That is, we have been reporting that our planes have received hostile reactions such as AA [antiaircraft fire] and SAM [missile] firings whether they have or not.”
CALCUTTA, India, June 17 (AP) — President Nikolai V. Podgorny of the Soviet Union has prolonged by a day his visit to North Vietnam.
The venerable jeep, which came home from war 27 years ago to become part of the post‐war dream for thousands of Americans, will not be part of the postwar scene when the troops come back from Vietnam.
PEKING, June 18—An atmosphere of expectancy prevailed in diplomatic circles in Peking today on the eve of Mr. Kissinger's arrival, but diplomats generally played down the idea of any dramatic breakthrough on Vietnam and other difficult issues.
NEW ORLEANS, June 18 (AP) — A committee of the United States Conference of Mayors, in a surprise move today, voted to sidestep discussion of busing to promote racial integration of the schools.
WASHINGTON, June 18—United States officials expressed considerable interest today in the Soviet President's forecast of an early resumption of the Paris talks on Vietnam,, but advised against any undue optimism in the absence of firm signs that Hanoi had changed its negotiating stance.
PEKING, June 18 (Agence mance Presse) — The North Vietnamese Ambassador, Ngo Thuyen, said here today that if President Nixon had any new ideas on Vietnam, they could be presented at the Paris peace talks.
COLOGNE, West Germany—Look ing from abroad at the American Presidential election I get the impression that there is quite a bit of hazard involved. It seems that it will be just accidental or unavoidable that Richard Nixon will obtain another term.
WASHINGTON, June 18—A number of former Government defense specialists believe that the recent disclosure that Gen. John D. Lavelle conducted a series of unauthorized bombings of North Vietnam reflects an even larger problem — the Nixon Administration's relaxation of command and control over the air war in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON—President Podgorny's visit to Hanoi and Henry Kissinger's trip to Peking may have been coincidental, rather than pre‐arranged to virtually coincide, but both may contribute to a new effort to negotiate peace In Vietnam. The return to Hanoi of North Vietnam's chief Paris negotiator, Le Duc Tho, suggests that new decisions are being taken there.
To the Editor:
PARIS, June 18—The four delegations to the peace talks here declined comment on the statement made by President Podgorny in Calcutta today.
SAIGON, Monday June 19 (Reuters) — President Nguyen Van Thieu said today the North Vietnamese offensive had been defeated and pledged that all territory lost to the Communists would be regained within three months.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, June 19—South Vietnamese troops have raided two areas occupied by North Vietnamese forces, according to military spokesmen.
WASHINGTON, June 19—Daniel Z. Henkin, the Pentagon's chief spokesman, has criticized those former Government officials who “hide behind the cloak of anonymity” while criticizing the Nixon Administration's conduct of the air war in Vietnam.
RACHKIEN, South Vietnam, June 16—Taking advantage of the major North Vietnamese attacks elsewhere local Communist units have been quietly reasserting control this spring over many of their once‐powerful bases in the provinces around Saigon. They are posing what officers on the scene consider a serious threat both to the vital pacification program and to the capital itself.
WASHINGTON, June 19—Common Cause, the citizens’ lobby, filed formal complaints today against The New York Times and the Committee to Impeach the President over an advertisement published May 31 in The Times.
To the Editor: There is a serious imbalance between Presidential and Congressional controls over war‐malting and foreign policy: The Senate appears impotent in the face of executive domination; the House is essentially an instrument of Presidential will.
A number of persons have written to ask why the money is constantly becoming less. Here are some of the more important reasons:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, June 20—The United States command reported yesterday that its planes destroyed more of North Vietnam's antiaircraft defenses during the previous 24 hours than in any period since Hanoi's offensive began March 30.
MOSCOW, June 19—The Soviet Union and North Vietnam today published a joint demand that the United States end the mining of North Vietnamese harbors and air raids against Hanoi's territory and resume “constructive” negotiations toward peace in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 19—The briefcase that Henry A. Kissinger took on his Peking visit today is bulging with position papers on everything from the suitability of basketball for diploatic Ping Pong to the cashand‐carry possibilities of some big Chinese‐American trade deals. But there is not much mystery about his overriding interest: Vietnam. Mr. kissinger's continuing purpose in Peking, like much of President Nixon's purpose there and in Moscow earlier this year, has been defined on many occasions by Mr. Kissinger and the few other informed Administration officials. It has been to enlist the Russians and the Chinese in an elaborate exercise, :both diplomatic and military, to persuade the North Vietnamese that the summer of 1972—meaning the weeks between now and Labor Day—is the optimum time for negotiating an end, of the war.
To the Editor: In the eyes of the “peace movement” and many segments of the press, it is an article of faith that President Thieu is a corrupt dictator and that Vietnamization is a delusion. But a recent headline in The Cleveland Plain Dealer —“Thieu Denied Rule by Decree”—tells us in a nutshell what Vietnamization is all about.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, June 21 (AP)—North Vietnamese backed by tanks counterattacked South Vietnamese marines north of Hue yesterday, triggering dawn‐to‐dust battle that left 268 men dead, military spokesman reported today.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 20 (AP)—The Cambodian command reported a series of enemy attacks today on the village of Taten, 15 miles southeast of Pnompenh. It said North Vietnamese troops overwhelmed the town on the east bank of the Bassac River and that burning houses were seen by reconnaissance planes.
WASHINGTON, June 20 —President Nixon today named Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, commander of United States forces in Vietnam, as the Army Chief of Staff.
WASHINGTON, June 20—President Nixon will make a new announcement before July 1 concerning the withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam, the White House said today.
WASHINGTON, June 20—A number of former Air Force photo interpreters — the men who help pick future bombing targets and assess results from previous raids — believe that the military has consistently exaggerated the effectivenss of bombing results in North Vietnam.
CHONTHANH, South Vietnam, June 20—It is only 15.6 miles from here to Anloc, but for two months more than 3,000 South Vietnamese troops and several American advisers have been killed or wounded trying to get there.
NEW ORLEANS, June 20—Three of the leading candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination brought their campaigns before the nation's bigcity Mayors today, but only Senator Hubert H. Humphrey won their unabashed support.
QUANGNGAI, ,South Vietnam, June 19—“Late in the afternoon the Communists came down to the camp and told us to move all our belongings out, because they were going to bUrn everything down,” an old man said, sifting through the.charred rubble of the Sonloc resettlement camp. He had called the camp home for four years because the Government had moved him there.
To the Editor: Anthony Lewis keeps telling us things we don't wish to hear about our actions in Vietnam. His reports and the television and radio coverage have brought this detestable war home to us even when we did not want to recognize what we were doing.
Peace in Vietnam is not around the corner, but an early resumption (3,4 serious negotiations in Paris, the vital prerequisite, should now be possible. With its sea supplies cut off by the American blockade, with China obstructing Soviet land shipments and with both its major allies putting their relations with Washington above their ties with Hanoi, the North Vietnam Government is under increasing pressure to explore a diplomatic settlement.
THE PRESIDENT Troops. The White House announced that the President would make a new announcement on troop withdrawals from Vietnam before the end of the month. Activities. The President met with John D. Ehrlichman, his chief adviser for domestic affairs, to discuss the $19‐billion omnibus education bill.
HONOLULU, June 20 (AP)—The Marine Corps commandant said that Marine A‐6 intruder planes began operating today from a newly prepared base in northern Thailand, where the corps is moving its air operations from Danang, South Vietnam.
NEW ORLEANS, June 21 —a reversal of policy, the United States Conference of Mayors voted today to support President Nixon's current strategy in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 21—A young Air Force officer, acting “because my superiors and fellow officers have failed to come forward,” formally accused Gen. John D. Lavelle today of criminal misconduct in connection with unauthorized strikes on North Vietnam and the falsification of official reports.
WASHINGTON, June 21—Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, charged the United Service Organizations today with covering up illegal activities by, its director and with playing down the extent of corruption by its employes in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 21—The Government issued a veiled warning to the foreign press today to stop writing what Saigon considers distorted; negative reports on the was situation.
DANANG, South Vietnam June 19—The United States Air Force is transferring three tactical fighter‐bomber squadrons from Danang to Thailand in a move that officers of the squadrons say will hamper their ability to fly air‐support missions in the crucial northern region of South Vietnam.
PARIS, June 21 — North Vietnam charged today that President Nixon was seeking to weaken and divide the forces supporting Hanoi's war effort and said that the maneuver would not succeed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, June 22 (AP) —American jet aircraft attacked North Vietnam's air defense network lust north of the demilitarized zone Tubsday for the sixth day, the United States command announced yesterday.
To the Editor: Your issue of June 13 had two columns, side by side on the front page, one in regard to General Lavelle, who testified that he authorized twenty bombing raids on North Vietnam without orders, and the other entitled “China Calls Raids Threat, to Border.”
WASHINGTON, June 21 (Reuters)—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that General Abrams did not know of unauthorized air strikes on North Vietnam in late 1971 and early 1972.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 21 (AP)—United States military sources said today that North Vietnam was trying to circumvent the mining of its harbors and rivers by unloading supplies from Chinese ships anchored offshore and hauling them inland aboard barges.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 21 — United States Air Force and Army oficers in Saigon are maintaining silence on the controversy about unauthorized bombing raids on North Vietnam last winter, despite the implications for Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, who has been nominated to be Army Chief of Staff.
WASHINGTON, June 21—A Defense Department spokesman said today that the Air Force squadrons being moved out of South Vietnam “will still be able to carry out their effort” from Thailand.
ROCKFORD, Ill., June 22 (UPI) — Lieut. Col Anthony Herbert, retired, the most decorated enlisted man in the Korean war, has announced his support for Senator George McGovern for the Democratic nomination for president. Colonel Herbert, who prompted a nationwide controversy when he leveled charges of dereliction of duty against his commanding officers in Vietnam in 1971, said yesterday that his decision to support the South Dakota Senator was his alone.
WASHINGTON, June 22—Following is a White House transcript of the news conference held today by President Nixon.
FORT BRAGG, N. C.—A woman is always asked to sit down in case she faints. If there are children, the mother is taken to another room so they will not learn of the death of their father from a stranger. It is expected that women will weep, often hysterically, but that men will take the news with greater calm and self‐control.
CHONTHANH, South Vietnam, June 22—After suffering) steep casualties for more than’ two months in an unsuccessful attempt to break through a Communist roadblock and enter Anloc, South Vietnam's 21st Division has been relieved of the responsibility for the job Old fresh troops have been thrown into the battle.
WASHINGTON, June 22 —The Pentagon said today that it was planning to reorganize the military command system in South Vietnam to reflect the diminishing American presence in the country.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 22 (UPI) — The Saigon Government will reject any inplace cease‐fire agreement in the Vietnam war, Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam said today.
The initiative of a young Air Force officer compels the Pentagon—and should impel Congress—to take a harder and deeper look at the case’ of Gen. John D. Lavelle, who ordered unauthorized raids against North Vietnam and reported them as “protective reaction” missions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 22—The South Vietnamese police have summarily arrested thousands of citizens suspected of Communist sympathies in the last two months, and officials say the detentions have denied help to the North Vietnamese that would have been invaluable in their offensive.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 22 (UPI) — South Vietnamese paratroopers and allied aircraft reportedly turned back a major North Vietnamese attack against the defense line west of Hue today, knocking out 18 Soviet‐built tanks and killing at least 146 enemy soldiers.
WASHINGTON, June 22 —The Supreme Court balanced property rights against freedom of expression today and concluded that owners of large suburban shopping centers might bar political pamphleteers from their premises.
WASHINGTON, June 22—about 2,000 women and children encircled the Capitol today in a protest against continued funding of the war in Vietnam.
PARIS, June 22—North Vietnam appealed to world opinion today to halt what it called “premeditated” effort by the United States to destroy its dike system and flood the country in the coming months.
WASHINGTON, June 22 — A Defense Department spokesman said today that the dikes were not a target of the American bombing of North Vietnam.

HONG KONG, June 22 (Reuters)—North Vietnam said today that more than 150 people had been killed and every building in Hongai, the capital of Quangninh Province, had been damaged or destroyed in United States air‐raids.
HONG KONG, June 22—An American source expressed the belief here today that China would like to see some serious negotiations to end the war in Vietnam. The source added that the Chinese might favor an approach more effective than that at the Paris meetings, which have produced little results.
WASHINGTON, June 22 —Seven South Vietnamese college students studying in the United States on grants from the Agency for International Development have refused to return to South Vietnam, saying they fear prosecution for their antiwar views.
PRINCETON, N. J.—"The whole world is crazy!” exclaims my 87‐year‐old great‐grandmother whenever my brother and I talk with her. That line always makes its way into any conversation with her; it is her view of the world and her explanation of its ills.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, June 24 (AP)— North Vietnamese troops shot down one of the United States largest computerized gunships on South Vietnam's northern front last Sunday night and 12 crewmen are missing, the American com mand announced today. Three crewmen were rescued.
The Police Academy graduated two new groups of specialists yesterday‐14 policewomen who will for the first time be assigned to neighborhood police teams, and 30 policemen who will serve as moderators in a recently instituted workshop program in “ethical awareness.”
ROME, June 23—Pope Paul VI said in an address to the College of Cardinals today that President Nixon's talks in Pe king and Moscow and other East‐West contacts had en couraged hope for peace in the Middle East and Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 23— Senator William Proxmire, Dem ocrat of Wisconsin, said today that he would oppose the nomi nation of Gen. Creighton W. Abrams as Army Chief of Staff unless the general “gives a complete and thoroughly satis factory explanation of the more than 20 unauthorized air strikes by the Seventh Air Force while Abrams commanded our forces in Vietnam.”
WASHINGTON, June 23 — A number of well informed critics of the Vietnam war, including some men still serving in the Government, said in interviews today that there was no evi dence to support repeated as sertions by Hanoi that the United States had been delib erately bombing dikes and dams in Ncirth Vietnam.
STOCKHOLM—At 73, Gunnar Myr dal looks like the film version of a shaggy, rambling professor wise with age. He maintains the interests that made him an international scholarly figure: Economic development of the poor countries, for example, and the race relations problems that he ex plored in his 1944 classic, “An Amer ican Dilemma.”
LAIKHE, South Vietnam, June 23—Although the enemy pres sure on Anloc has eased some what, American helicopters are still flying nearly all of the highly dangerous support and troop‐carrying missions into the town while large numbers of South Vietnamese helicopters sit idle on their pads, their crews lounging and sleeping.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, June 24—North Viet namese forces reportedly struck again yesterday against the Government's northern defense line after having been repulsed the day before, and there was growing apprehension here that they were opening a new south ward drive.
SAIGON, Saturday, June 24 (AP)—The United States com mand reported yesterday that American fighter‐bombers flew more than 250 strikes over North Vietnam Thursday.
When Henry A. Kissinger, the White House adviser on national security affairs, went to China early last week there was speculation that something was brewing on Vietnam. The speculation was heightened when Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny, en route home from Hanoi, predicted that the Paris peace talks would resume soon.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, June 24—A distinguished Soviet scholar is spending nine months touring United States universities to study the foreign policy of China.
WASHINGTON, June 24— (Reuters)—The United States told France 25 years ago that she should be most generous in her attempts to settle the war against Ho Chi Minh and the Vietminh forces in Indochina or she might play into the hands of the Communists in Southeast Asia, according to State Department documents released this week.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, June 24— Henry A. Kissinger said today that he had discussed the Viet nam war at length with Chi nese leaders but reported no clear signs of a break in the present diplomatic impasse.
Joan Baez, the folksinger, became a marcher for the civil rights movement from the beginning, and when the United States became deeply involved in Vietnam, she took up the antiwar cry. Now, at 31, she is regarded as a sort of professional protester and her involvement in— as she puts it—“radical, nonviolent action” is familiar. Last week Miss Baez was at it again. After weeks of or ganizing work in Washington, she led more than 2,000 women and children who linked hands in a “ring around the Capitol” to protest the continued Congressional funding of the war. “More than $4.5‐billion will go next year into blowing up Indochina,” the singer declared. “We're saying, keep that money at home.”
ONE wonders how our own Civil War would have ended if Matthew Brady and his photog raphers had been able to take instantaneous photo graphs of wounded soldiers dying in agony. There was in the North a peace party quite as vociferous as the peace party in the United States today. There were riots against the war far bloodier and more violent than any peace demonstra tion today, and on several occasions Northern oppo nents of the war hampered its conduct so seriously that President Lincoln saw fit to suspend the right of habeas corpus and imprison them by the thousands without trial.
STOCKHOLM, June 24 (UPI) —A Swedish diplomat has said that United States bombers over North Vietnam were at tacking almost “anything.”
WASHINGTON, June 24— Senior officers in the Pentagon expect the North Vietnamese to renew their offensive, using conventional tactics and weap ons, in the northern part of South Vietnam and in the Kon tum area of the Central High lands in the near future.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 25—North Viet namese tanks and infantry made a series of day‐long at tacks on Government defense lines north of Hue yesterday in an apparently unsuccessful effort to breakthrough toward the city, the Saigon command reported.
HANOI, North Vietnam, June 24—This correspondent and a fel other members of the foreign press visited the town of Nam dinh, a textile center about 60 miles south of Hanoi, today.
PARIS—American Presidential cam paigns sometimes cast long shadows overseas and this particularly appears to be the case in 1972. Already one foreign ambassador has been re proached for hints of intervention and, far more important, many capitals appear to be taking exceptional in terest in the projected contest.
MORGANTOWN, W. Va., June 25 (AP)—A general amnesty for draft evaders and deserters would be an “insult” to Vietnam veterans, Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Vir ginia and the Senate majority whip, told the West Virginia Veterans of Foreign Wars state meeting here today.
To one who has bombed and been bombed, recent Pentagon propaganda about our new “smart” bombs is dumb and repetitious (not to say, indecent). That's the kind of sure‐kill language we were using twenty‐eight years ago, when I was a bombardier navigator with the 15th Air Force in Italy. Then it was the Norden bombsight that was supposed to give us pinpoint precision bombing. Now they're saying the same thing about laser and TV‐guided bombs we have begun dropping on the people we use as live dummies for target practice in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 25— The Nixon Administration be lieves that the current policy review in Hanoi should provide a firm indication within the next two weeks whether a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war is feasible before the United States Presidential election in November.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 25 (UPI)—The Army said today that it would withdraw about 800 infantrymen from Phubai, the United States' northernmost South Vietna mese outpost, near Hue.
LONDON, June 25 — The Tonkin plain of North Vietnam is hemmed in by mountains to the north and west, the sea to the southeast. In the rainy season every summer vast amounts of water pour out of the mountains and down the rivers that lace the plain. The principal river gives its name to the area: the Red River Delta.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 25—Remote as the prospects of peace now seem to most South Vietnamese, at least a few high officials here have begun to worry about the stag gering social and economic problems that peace and de mobilization will bring.
MIDDLETOWN TOWNSHIP, N. J., June 25 (AP)—About 50 members of the People's Block ade, an antiwar group, staged a mile‐long march to the main gate the Earle Naval Ammuni tion Depot here today. The walk was peaceful and there were no arrests. The protests was part of a continuing demonstration at the depot against the war.
ST. LOUIS, June 25—Rank and‐file union members attend ing an antiwar meeting split with their leadership during the weekend over whether a new labor peace organization should press for a national strike to protest the war in Vietnam.
PHILADELPHIA, June 25 (UPI)—A three‐Judge Federal panel will hear arguments to morrow in a suit challenging the constitutionality of the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, June 26— American fighter‐bombers using guided bombs have wrecked North Vietnam's only modern steel plant, halting production there, the United States command said yesterday.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, June 26 (AP)—The United States command said the shift of American fighter bomber squadrons from Danang to bases in Thailand was com pleted today. The transfer, re ports on which were published earlier this month, was said to have involved more than 2,000 airmen and up to 150 planes.
WASHINGTON, June 26—A detailed description of the United States' long, often futile effort to get Vietnam peace talks started during the John son Administration was made public tonight.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 26 — The United States command announced today that it had tightened its control over the air war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, June 27 (UPI)—Twen ty Air Force fighter‐bombers have attacked a power plant 25 miles northwest of Hanoi with laser‐guided “smart bombs” that “effectively destroyed” its use fulness and blacked out part of the North Vietnamese capi tal, the United States com mand said yesterday.
I received this letter from my mother in Saigon a few days ago. My mother has eight children, four of whom are fighting in the Saigon Army. I myself am a student here in the United States.
“The nation had to have a strong man, a decent man, a good man as Chief of Staff, You were the right man in the right job at the right time.” So saying at a White House ceremony, President Nixon pinned the Distin guished Service Medal upon the uniform of Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who ends 36 years of military service with his retirement Friday. Last week Mr. Nixon an nounced his selection of Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, now the United States commander in Vietnam, as General West moreland's successor.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 26—The United States has established a 25‐mile‐wide buf fer zone in North Vietnam next to the Chinese border within which it does not bomb, an American official reported to day.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, June 26 (UPI)—A hand grehade being tossed back and forth in a game of “chicken” between two American soldiers explod ed, killing both of them and a third soldier who had stepped into their quarters to get a cigarette, Army officials said today.
To the Editor:
VIENTIANE, Laos, June 26 (UPI)—North Vietnamese troops opened up on the key Laotian defense has at Long Tieng with the biggest artillery pieces in their arsenal in the first attack on the outpost in a month, a Defense Ministry spokesman said today.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Tues day, June 27,—Two United States F‐4 bombers on a raid over Hanoi were shot down over the capital today.
PROVIDENCE, R. I., June 26 (AP) — Senator Claiborne Pell says he believes that American military forces have used ad vanced rain‐making technology to cause flooding and death in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 26— After heated debate, the Plat form Committee of the Demo cratic National Convention ap proved today an education plank that calls for continued use of busing to achieve school desegregation.
WASHINGTON, June 26 — United States intelligence offi cials said today that the North Vietnamese were about to com plete—or might already have completed—the laying of a fuel pipeline from Hanoi to China's border.
MOSCOW, June 27—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Communist party leader, today condemned United States bombings of industrial targets in North Vietnam and vowed continued aid to Hanoi “until victory of its just cause.”
WASHINGTON, June 27—Following are excerpts from the four volumes of the Pentagon papers dealing with efforts to reach a peace settlement in Vietnam, as made available today by the columnist Jack Anderson:
WASHINGTON, June 27—The Capitol police arrested 111 antiwar protesters who blocked a hallway outside the Senate chamber this afternoon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 27—In an extraordinary session of the South Vietnamese Senate tonight, pro‐Government senators pushed through a bill giving President Nguyen Van Thieu authority to rule by decree on matters of defense and economics for six months. The vote was 26 to 0.
WASHINGTON, June 27 (UPI)—Administration officials disclosed today that President Nixon plans to announce another troop withdrawal from Vietnam. They said that Mr. Nixon was preparing to disclose tomorrow the size of a new reduction beyond the level of the 49,000 men that was his goal for the end of this month.
LITTLE ROCK, Ark., June 27 —Asserting that President Nixon had been “playing to racist emotions,” Senator George McGovern traveled across the South today, appealing to Populist sentiments.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, June 28 — American planes flew more than 320 strikes against North Vietnam Monday and attacked targets within the city limits of Hanoi and Haiphong.
Personal message, cabled with “flash” priority, from President Lyndon B. Johnson to Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, United States Ambassador to South Vietnam, May 10, 1965. U. Alexis Johnson was deputy ambassador to Saigon and the Premier was Phan Huy Quat.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 27 (Reuters)—The chief of the central coastal province of Binhdinh, one of the country's most populous and politically troubled areas, has been dismissed by Saigon, the official news agency reported today.
Reply from North Vietnamese message, handed to Mr. Marcovich by Mr. Bo on Sept. 11, 1967.
WASHINGTON, June 27 —The Pentagon papers volumes on the secret diplomacy of the Johnson Administration show that Hanoi and Washington could not reach a peace settlement because they could not compromise their basic disagreement over who would hold power in South Vietnam.
The United States is a four‐time loser in the bombing of North Vietnam's only steel plant. The fifth bombing last weekend again has halted production there, but it is unlikely that it will hamper North Vietnam's war effort any more significantly than did the other four. Nor is there any substantial military purpose to be achieved in the stepped‐up aerial attacks this week in the HanoiHaiphong area, which undoubtedly are taking a heavy civilian toll.
Reports on conversations with Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam held in Hanoi in July, 1967, by Raymond Aubrac and Herbert Marcovich, French scientists who are friends of Henry A. Kissinger.
WASHINGTON, June 27 —Newly disclosed sections of the Pentagon papers show that the Soviet Union, after first rebuffing American requests in 1965 to serve as a Middleman in ending the Vietnam war, became progressively more interested in acting as a diplomatic channel between Washington and Hanoi. But, the papers add, Moscow always seemed unwilling to put pressure on North Vietnam to give up its struggle.
Message from United States to Mai Van Bo, North Vietnamese representative in Europe, dated Aug. 25, 1967.
WASHINGTON, June 27—President Nixon's request for increased spending authority to improve the nation's arsenal of strategic weapons in the wake of the recent arms control agreements with the Soviet Union was overwhelmingly endorsed today by the House of Representatives.
WASHINGTON, June 28—A staff report of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee asserted today that the De fense Department pumped an additional total of $155‐million into the South Vietnamese economy last year by devising a system of separate exchange rates for private and official transactions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 28 — The South Vietnam ese Government announced to day that it had apprehended two men who had confessed to the asassination of the head of a pro‐Government political movement last Nov. 10. It said the men had acted under in structions from Vietnamese Communists.
WASHINGTON, June 28 — President Nixon ordered today that from now on, no draftees be sent to Vietnam unless they volunteer for duty there.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 28—After nearly three months of some of the fiercest fighting of the war, the lead ing American officials in Vietnam say they are optimistic about South Vietnam's short run chances for withstanding the North Vietnamese offen sive, even with major battles north of the city of Hue ex pected soon.
WASHINGTON, June 28— The General Accounting Office charged The New York Times today with an “apparent viola tion” of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, a law designed to regulate and limit spending in political campaigns.
HUE, South Vietnam, Thurs day, June 29—A force of about 10,000 South Vietnamese ma rines and paratroopers pushed above the country's northern most defense line yesterday, starting a drive to retake Quangtri Province, which fell to the North Vietnamese nearly two months ago.
MOSCOW, June 28 (UPI) —The Soviet Union said to day the Vietnam plank in the Democratic party platform represented a “full revision” of the party's former policy, but cautioned that it was “clearly a pre‐election pos ture.”
WASHINGTON, June 28 — Dean Rusk returned to Capitol Hill today and lectured Con gress, as he did when he was Secretary of State, on the need for a firm defense posture and the futility of negotiating with the North Vietnamese.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 28 —Members of the politi cal opposition are angry over what they consider trickery in the way the Senate rammed through a bill giving special decree powers to President Nguyen Van Thieu.
WASHINGTON, June 28 — Senator John C. Stennis, con fronted with new testimony linking Gen. Creighton W. Abrams to the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam, an nounced today that the Armed Forces Committee would hold full hearings into the pending retirement of Gen. John D. Lavelle.
STOCKHOLM, Sweden, June 28 (Reuters)—Sweden's Ambas sador to Hanoi today accused the United States of pursuing “a policy or annihilation” in its bombing of North Vietnam.
PEKING, June 28 (Reuters)— China today criticized the in creased United States use of air bases in Thailand to strike at targets in North Vietnam. She said that American planes had carried out “savage bombing” of Hanoi and other places.
WASHINGTON, June 29 — The Senate Armed Services Committee approved today most of a $1.3‐billion increase in the strategic weapons pro gram that the Administration contends is necessary to main tain United States military strength in the wake of the arms control agreements with the Soviet Union.
HUE, South Vietnam, June 29—One of Hue's four movie houses, a small steambath known as the Tan Tan (New New) Cinema, reopened a few days ago. It is showing as its first feature an Eastmancolor production entitled “1971 World's Girls Wrestling Cham pionship Contest,” starring Mildred Burke, Patty O'Hara and Texasan Red.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, June 30—In response to news that the United States would resume peace talks in Paris, the Saigon Government said today that it would show “maximum goodwill once more time” by joining in the talks.
At the White House in Washington, Richard Nixon toyed with a gold pen and scratchpad in the Cabinet Room and flashed a smile for photographers. It was Richard Nixon, 9 years old, of Albany, who wrote last April to the other Richard Nixon to say he would “like to see Wash ington more than anything else.” A local National Guard unit raised money for the visit by young Richard and 17 third ‐ grade classmates, who did not see the President because he was at Camp David. Asked if he was disap pointed, young Richard, show ing a talent for big‐time politics, remained silent.
WASHINGTON, June 29 — President Nixon disclosed to night that the United States and North Vietnam would re sume the Paris peace talks on the Vietnam war on July 13.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 29 (UPI) — A South Viet namese Senator, Vo Van Truyen, said today that he had been lured out of Saigon and left stranded in the countryside to keep him from voting against the bill granting special powers to President Nguyen Van Thieu.
The resumption of the Paris peace talks July 13 with out precondition by either side, as announced by Presi dent Nixon last night, is the best way to end the Vietnam war and the American involvement. Neither the Admin istration's Vietnamization program nor its withdrawal of American ground troops is likely to do so.
How far to the left has President Nixon moved in his quest for “peace” in Vietnam? He has himself said that if he took a single step further to the left, he would be in the camp of the enemy whose combat‐fire has already killed over 45,000 American soldiers.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, June 30—About 1,000 South Vietnamese marines were flown by United States helicopters yesterday into an area between the city of Quangtri and the South China Sea to join in the drive to re take the Communist‐held prov ince.
Following is a transcript of Presi dent Nixon's televised news confer ence last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
A freelance journalist who is executive director of the National Committee for Re sponsible Patriotism said yes terday that much of the news reporting on the North Viet namese invasion of South Viet nam had been slanted, as were accounts of his own “fact‐find ing” visit to Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 29 — President Nixon told his news conference tonight that continued bombing would give Hanoi an incentive to return American prisoners of war, rather than “not ac count for them, as was the case when the French got out of Vietnam in 1954 and 15,000 French were never accounted for after that.”
The Offtrack Betting Corpo ration, reviewing its six months of experience with a betting’ shop run entirely by former drug addicts, decided yesterday to open another such shop, this one entirely for Vietnam veter ans trying to rid themselves of the drug habit.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 31 (UPI)— President Nixon's Feb. 1 deadline for reducing American troop strength in South Vietnam to 139,000 was met four days ahead of time, the United States command said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 1 (AP)—American fighter‐bombers attacked surface‐to‐air missile sites, antiaircraft‐artillery batteries and radar defenses inside North Vietnam yesterday in the heav‐iest air action over the north this year, the United States command announced today.
WASHINGTON, 31—Following is a, comparison of the nine‐point peace proposal made public by the North Vietnamese delegation in Paris today and the eight‐point plan of the Governments of the United States and South” Vietnam revealed by President Nixon on Jan. 25: North Vietnam plan: The withdrawal of “the totality” of all United States and allied foreign “forces from South Vietnani and other Indochinese countries should be completed within 1971. (The plan was first proposed privately June 26, 1971.)
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 31—After nearly a week of talks with field commanders, Gen. William C. Westmoreland said today that there was every indication that the North Vietnamese were preparing for a major offensive in South Vietnam soon.
PARIS, Jan. 31—North Vietnam made public today the nine‐point peace program it had secretly submitted to the United States last June and charged that Washington had not seriously considered it.
COLUMBUS, Ohio, Jan. 31 (AP) — The national commander of the American Legion, John H. Geiger, said today that the veterans’ organization strongly opposes amnesty for Vietnam deserters who have fled to other lands.
MANCHESTER, N. H., Jan. 31—Four years ago yesterday, the great Tet offensive of 1968 began in Vietnam. Eugene McCarthy, then a virtually ignored Presidential candidate, told reporters that if they “give it three weeks” to build, the political repercussions bring him victory in the New Hampshire primary.
MIAMI BEACH, Jan. 31 (AP) —Ray Conniff, the orchestra leader, said today that he received a telephone call yesterday from President Nixon reassuring him that the President was not upset about an incident in which a singer staged an antiwar protest during White House performance Friday. “He was very gracious, and I thought it was pretty wonderful that he take time out of his very busy schedule to call because he knew my wife and I were upset by the event,” Mr. Conniff said.
PARIS, Jan. 31—Following, as issued in English today by the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris talks, is the text of a communique in response to President Nixon's disclosure of the private peace negotiations. Included with it by Hanoi are the texts of the nine‐point North Vietnamese peace plan presented at the private sessions on June 26 and of the version of the eight‐point United States plan that Hanoi says it received at those sessions.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—The Nixon Administration took note today of North Vietnam's decision to make public its own nine‐point peace plan, but declined any specific comment.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Jan. 31 (UPI) — South Vietnamese soldiers patrolling a downtown bar strip in this Central Highlands capital killed an American soldier and wounded another early today, military sources reported. The cause of the shooting has not yet been determined. The names of the Americans were withheld until their families are notified.
PNOMPENH, Jan. 31 (AP)—Diplomatic sources here report that the Cambodians are prepared to accept an agreement whereby the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong withdraw to sparsely populated provinces east of the Mekong River and to an area north of rubber plantations along Route 7 that is almost due east of here.
To the Editor:. In your Dec. JO editorial “Vietnam's Korean Solution,'” you state that in 1965 Korea was notified of an Ameritan plan to, withdraw two American divisions from forward positions and base them near Pusan as a “Strategic reserve” for all of Asia:, The editorial goes on to say that President Park had seen the handwriting ‘On the wall and offered to send equivalent Korean troops to Vietnam if the two American divisions remain in place near the North Korean border.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—It is now obvious that the North Vietnamese are not going to get a peace settlement unless they make allowances for the ancient American concept of “face.”
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Jan. 31 (UPI)—The Government of Premier Lon Nol has reportedly approached North Vietnam through the Soviet Embassy here, seeking negotiations in the hope of ending the fighting in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31 (AP) —Sgt. Maj. William 0. Wooldridge, once the Army's top enlisted man now under Federal indictment on charges of conspiring to defraud enlisted men's clubs in Vietnam, will retire tomorrow with full pension and benefits, the Army announced today.
AS a signatory of the Geneva Convention of 1949, the United States is bound to “search for” and bring to trial all persons who have committed “grave breaches” of the laws of war, and to “enact any legislation necessary to provide effective penal sanctions for persons committing” grave breaches. As the nation which for over a century took the lead in codifying and applying the laws of war, the United States is bound to govern the conduct of its armed forces by the standards that have been applied to the soldiers of Germany, Japan and other nations. Now that the last of the courts‐martial relating to the Mylai killings has concluded, it is time to assess our Government's role and obligations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 2—The United States command announced this morning that American warplanes conducted five bombing raids on antiaircraft sites in North Vietnam yesterday, bringing the number of such strikes to 11 in two days.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1—The Nixon Administration today released its own text of the nine‐point peace proposal it received from North Vietnam last June 26 and reiterated its willingness to try to negotiate an agreement on the basks of its provisions.
BENHET, South Vietnam, Jan. 30—”I trust God,” an American adviser to the South Vietnamese Rangers in this mountainous border outpost in the Central Highlands wrote in chalk in the bunker where he sleeps.
HONG KONG, Feb. 1 (Agence France‐Presse) — The United States informed North Vietnam in a “private message” last October that President Nixon's eight‐point peace plan for Indochina went “to the possible limits of generosity,” the North Vietnamese press agency reported today.
Following the President's startling announcement on nationwide TV of the extensive and energetic efforts which he and Dr. Kissinger have made to find a workable solution to the Vietnam impasse, I settled back to watch the commentary on the several networks.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1—Senator George McGovern is using a four‐year‐old recording of an endorsement by Robert F. Kennedy to promote his Presidential campaign, and the backers of Senator Edmund S. Muskie do not like it.
Patrolmen Gregory P. Foster and Rocco W. Laurie, who had been Marine Corps comrades in Vietnam, and who walked a beat together on the Lower East Side, were buried yesterday.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Feb 1 (Agence FrancePresse)—The Foreign Ministry said today that reports of contacts between the Cambodian Government in Pnompenh and North Vietnany were nothing but a hoax.
I find it disturbing that some of the Democratic Presidential candidates were taken in by President Nixon's “new” peace plan. Although Mr. Nixon did not mention it in his speech, point five of the eight‐point proposal would require North Vietnam to withdraw all its forces from South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. This is in essence the same six‐month mutual withdrawal plan offered by President Johnson. He also offered “free” elections.
MOSCOW, Feb. 1—The Soviet Union today took a new step in what appears to be campaign to exploit North Vietnam's uneasiness over President Nixon's forthcoming visit to China and thereby increase Moscow's influence in Hanoi.
In his address to the nation on the Vietnam peace negotiations, President Nixon said the following: “Honest and patriotic Americans have disagreed as to whether we should have become involved at all nine years ago.”
President Nixon's new Vietnam peace proposal comes very close to an abject surrender to Communist aggression in Southeast Asia.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Feb. 1 (AP) —The Pathet Lao and North Vietnamese forces were reported today to have expanded their control of part of the northern Laotian road linking Vientiane with the royal capital of Luang Prabang.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Feb. 1 (Reuters) — Information Minister Long Boret denied today that the Cambodian Government itself had so far undertaken any contacts, direct or indirect, with a view to starting peace talks’ with North Vietnam.
Elia Kazan's "The Visitors," written by his eldest son, Chris Kazan, and shot in 16-mm, entirely in and around the Kazan country home in Newton, Conn., concerns the ordeal of Bill Schmidt (James Woods), an ex-G.I. who, with Martha (Patricia Joyce), the unwed mother of his baby, is threatened for 16 hours by two former buddies against whom the G.I. brought evidence of war crimes during their tour of duty in Vietnam.In the course of a routine patrol, the two former soldiers, along with other members of their squad, had first raped a young Vietnamese girl, who might possibly have been a Vietcong sympathizer, and then bayoneted her to death.It is one of the oddities of "The Visitors," which is otherwise not exactly shy of exposition, that although Schmidt remains a shadowy character, the very fact that he can't explain why he turned in his two friends is one of the most interesting and meaningful aspects of the movie. It's as if it had been an unconscious impulse, a dim vestige of the kind of honor that today is as practical as an appendix."The Visitors" is a far from great film. It insists on saying too much about large issues when it should keep quiet and it's ambiguous when one has a right to expect explicit answers. Yet it is an extremely moving film, partly, I think, because everything—from the physical production to the melodrama—is kept in small scale, as if not to get in the way of, or to confuse, its very legitimate expression of a major American sorrow.I must emphasize, however, that I find "The Visitors" moving not only because I happen to share the Kazans' political and moral concerns. As anyone who squirmed through the idiocies of "Johnny Got His Gun" knows, the sharing of such concerns can often be a fate worse than death. Chris Kazan's screenplay sometimes has all of the grace of the Dalton Trumbo non-classic, especially in speeches that persist in spelling out simplistic points that, with any luck, we've already gotten."The Visitors," however, is very much an Elia Kazan film and he is still a first-rate director, particularly of actors, in this case of four new young actors who possess the mystery and self-assurance of much more experienced performers. Especially effective is Steve Rails-back as the more murderous of the two visitors, a young man who looks like the sort of a nice, clean-cut, small-town American boy who could eat a piece of apple pie with one hand and cut a friend's throat with the other. However, I also liked Chico Martinez as the other visitor and both Miss Joyce and Mr. Woods, whose performances — mannerisms, movements, ways of touching each other—must supply explanations that Chris Kazan was apparently too busy to develop.The nominal star of the film is Patrick McVey as Miss Joyce's novelist-father, and it may be that my reaction to him is as much influenced by the unpleasant character he plays as by his performance, which does seem a bit broad even for a football-loving whisky-guzzling, right-wing fool. Says Miss Joyce at one point: "My mother couldn't stand him—and neither could his other two wives."For the most part, the elder Kazan keeps "The Visitors" remarkably unfancy and untricky. There is one almost nostalgic moment that recalls Mr. Kazan's best work of the 1950's, when, as in certain scenes in "A Streetcar Named Desire" and "On the Waterfront," he employs highly theatrical melodrama—in this case, a scene in which Miss Joyce allows herself to be sexually drawn to one of the terrifying visitors—in such a way that the theatricality becomes real dramatic substance, and not a substitution for it."The Visitors," which opened yesterday at the Little Carnegie, repeatedly reminded me of Sam Peckinpah's more flamboyant "Straw Dogs," and although I don't think it ranks higher in any appreciable respect, I'd much rather argue about it—what's right with it as well as what's wrong with it.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 2 (UPI) — The United States command reported today that two more air strikes had been made on North Vietnam yesterday, raising to seven the total for the day.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2—Senator Edmund S. Muskie outlined today a two‐point plan to end the war in Vietnam. He declared that President Nixon's peace proposals were no more than an attempt “to win at the conference table what we have not won and cannot win on the battlefield.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 —Henry A. Kissinger has expressed the view that the Senate defeat of the foreign aid bill last Oct. 29 was among a number of factors that led to the suspension of the secret negotiations between the United States and North Vietnam in November.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Feb. 3 (Reuters) The Saigon command said today that South Vietnamese jets destroyed four North Vietnamese tanks yesterday in the border area where Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam meet.
As a result of President Nixon's disclosure of the secret peace talks and the publication of Hanoi's nine‐point plan and Washington's counter‐proposal, Americans and the world for the first time can examine the real negotiating postures taken by both sides in secret, rather than public proposals framed with an eye to propaganda advantage.
WASHINGTON—Hubert Humphrey's recent reference to his stance on Vietnam during the 1968 Presidential campaign (“I pledged an end to the bombing, a cease‐fire and an immediate troop withdrawal”) has, not surprisingly, brought forth some pointed reminders of his much more ambivalent position at the time. Tom Wicker rightly recalls that Humphrey's actual statement on the Vietnam issue made in late September 1968 was weak in its substance and tardy in its timing. Mr. Wicker takes on the painful task of going back into recent history as part of the press’ duty to “keep the record straight.” But there is more to the record and this is as good a time as any to reveal it.
ALBANY, Feb. 2—The Legislature ended its fifth so‐called “work week” of the 1972 session today after the Assembly engaged in irate rhetoric over the wording of a resolution expressing the deep feelings of sorrow and shock of the members” over the slayings of two New York City policemen last week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 3—American officials, in a reversal of a 10‐year‐old policy, appear to he going to extraordinary lengths to spread bad news about the war in Vietnam.
BOSTON, Feb. 3—The city of Boston got two visitors from the South today the heaviest snowstorm of the year and John Vliet Lindsay, a Presidential candidate from New York.
ALBUQUERQUE, N. M. — The real tragedy of Mylai remains obscure even after the Medina and Henderson trials dragged on in Calley's wake. The ultimate tragedy was not Calley: his killing was horrible enough, And it was not the cover‐up which in its long term effect on the Army will probably prove just as horrible, Rather, the real tragedy was Mylai as the culminetion of several incidents which, taken together, indicate a disturbing degree of erosion of moral principle within the Army.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 3—The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee urged Senators today to find a way to force Henry A. Kissinger, the President's adviser on national security, to appear before his panel and testify on American foreign policy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 4 (UPI) —Military spokesmen said today that South Vietnamese troops clashed with guerrillas in four sharp battles yesterday in sudden outbreak of fighting in the U Minh Forest, a long‐time enemy base area at the southern tip of the country.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 3—Secretary of State William P. Rogers accused Senator Edmund S. Muskie today of jeopardizing the prospects for a negotiated peace in Vietnam by rejecting the President's latest peace proposals before the enemy replied formally.
THEARNHEITER AFFAIR. By Neil Sheehan. 304 pages. Illustrated. Random House. $7.95. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 3 (UPI)—Five Americans were killed in action last week in South Vietnam, the United States command reported today. It was the 17th consecutive week in which there were fewer than 10 American cornbat deaths.
ACTIVITIES. The President met separately with United States Ambassadors Kenneth Keating of India and Ellsworth Bunker of South Vietnam. He also greeted athletes who had participated in antidrug radio and television commercials and met with yevgeny yevtushenko, the Russian poet. He conferred the rank of ambassador on Joseph Martin Jr., a consultant to the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and designated him to serve as chief United States representative to the conference of the Commission on Disarmament, which begins its annual meeting Feb 29 in Geneva. The President departed for Key Biscayne, where he will spend the weekend.
PARIS, Feb. 3—Following are excerpts from the revised Vietcong proposals presented at the session of the Vietnam peace talks today:
PARIS, Feb. 3 — The Vietcong presented at the peace talks here today a revised version of their seven‐point peace plan of last July that appeared more conciliatory to the preslent South Vietnamese Government.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 3 —President Nixon is apparently going to allow the members of his Cabinet to get deeply involved in the controversies of the Presidential election campaign, and this raises some obvious difficulties and dangers.
ANTALYA, Turkey, Feb. 3 (AP)—Two American seamen, reported missing from a destroyer that called at this Mediterranean resort town, have been taken into custody in a hotel, the police reported today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 4 (UPI) An organization of scientists, social scientists and engineers expressed new opposition today to United States air raids on North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 4—Democratic Presidential aspirants clashed with Republicans and one another today over Senator Edmund. S. Muskie's criticism of President Nixon's eight‐point peace proposal for Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 4 — Vinh, a goodnatured 17‐year‐old who likes American cigarettes and cowboy movies, carries an American carbine on his post when he is not snoozing or playing cards in the lobby of an apartment building on Tu Do Street.
HONG KONG, Feb. 4—An official statement issued by the Chinese Government today, condemned President Nixon's eight‐point proposal for ending the war in Vietnam and reaffirmed China's support for the Communist cause in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 4 (Reuters)—Foreign Minister Tran Vam Lam today rejected” the Vietcong's peace formula, presented yesterday in Paris, which calls for the immediate resignation of President Thieu.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 5 (AP) — American fighter‐bombers destroyed an enemy surface‐to‐air missile and the vehicle transporting it through southern Laos in daylight yesterday, the United. States command said today.
MOSCOW, Feb. 4 (AP)—The Soviet press agency Tass said today that North Vietnam and the Vietcong had informed the Soviet Government that Mr. Nixon's eight‐point peace plan was an attempt to impose an American settlement in Vietnam and that they were “resolutely rejecting Washington's new maneuvers.”
MONTCLAIR — My wife, the county committeewoman, was elected by the Demomatte voters of the Watchung section of Montclair on the platform, “Peace in Vietmull, and a Traffic light in Watchung Plaza.”
To the Editor: Various Democrt lc Presidential candidates are increasingly critical of President Nixon's policy of Vietnamization. With an election fast approaching, these critics find all manner of fallacy in the President's careful, calculated policy of extricating the country from a very difficult war. Their choice would be a quick cut‐and‐run policy, applied not only to Vietnam but to foreign policy generally.
CHARLESTON, Ill., Feb. 5—Senator Edmund S. Muskie as serted today that he would “rather end this war than win this election.”
Two chief warrant officers, with a record of combat service in Vietnam, have run up a very funny burlesque out of some of that largely unfunny war's ambiguities. Army lampoons are all too easy to initiate; this one has an infusion of honest venom that lifts it above journeyman comedy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 5 (AP)—South Vietnamese headquarters said today that 54 enemy soldiers had been killed in clashes in the Central Highlands along the Coast, many of them in ambushes.
TANHOA, South Vietnam — This isolated hamlet is one of the last two in the Mekong delta where, according to official security ratings, the Vietcong govern and the South Vietnamese Government has no control General Nghi and has worked with him since the operation began on Jan. 7. He does not like the idea of shifting the peasants.
HOMEWOOD, Ala., Feb. 5 (AP) — A 25‐year‐old Vietnam veteran has been fined $100 for wearing his army uniform. Kevin Doherty of Oak Ridge, N. J., a prelaw student at the University of Alabama, was found guilty in City Court Wednesday of violating a state law prohibiting civilians from wearing military uniforms or any part of them. He was wearing a uniform jacket.
This is an entertaining account of a hilarious and yet deeply disturbing episode of the Vietnam war: the circumstances surrounding the abrupt dismissal of Marcus Aurelius Arnheiter, commanding officer of the U.S.S. Vance, an over‐age DER (destroyer escort radar) assigned to coastal patrol off Vietnam in 1966.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5—Hanoi and Washington appeared today to be completely at odds in their public versions of at least two crucial points in last year's secret negotiations in Paris to settle the Vietnam war.
PARIS, Feb. 5—North Vietnam's chief delegate to the Paris peace talks said today that the military and political conditions for a settlement of the Vietnam war were separable last summer, when the Vietcong presented their seven‐point proposal, but were separable no longer.
HUE, South Vietnam, Feb. 5 —Despite predictions to the contrary, South Vietnamese and American officers in the far north of South Vietnam are not expecting a major enemy offensive here this month.
HANOI, North Vietnam; Feb. 5 (Agence France‐Presse)—North Vietnam today formally rejected President Nixon's eight‐point peace plan for Indochina, terming it “deceptive.”
FORT WALTON, Fla., Feb. 5 —In probably the most poignant event of his Presidential campaign so far, Mayor Lindsay met here today with a dozen wives of American servicemen who are either prisoners of war or missing in action.
TRENTON — Many private employment agencies in New Jersey will charge reduced fees when they help obtain Sobs for returning Vietnam veterans, Richard J. Miele, chairman of a state task force on veteran's employment, has announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 6 —The National Museum of South Vietnam is a huge peach — colored building with great flying eaves in the style of a Confucian temple.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 7 (AP)—American helicopters dropped napalm yesterday on what appeared to be newly built North Vietnamese bunkers 25 miles northeast of Saigon, according to field reports. The operation was said to be intended offset anticipated Tet Lunar New Year attacks in the capital region.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6 —Following are excerpts from interviews with Xuan Thuy; the North Vietnamese delegate to the Paris peace talks, and Secretary of State William P. Rogers as broadcast today on the Columbia Broadcasting System television program “Face the Nation,” and transcribed by The New York Times. Mr. Thuy, whose interview was taped Friday in Paris, spoke in Vietnamese and his remarks were then translated into English.
SAIGON—Angela will be 3 years old in April, but she walks like a tiny old woman who falters because she is afraid of falling.
CLOGHOGE, Northern Ireland, Feb. 6—For the first time in nearly four years of civil rights, demonstrations in Northern Ireland, thousands of persons from the Irish Republic crossed today to join in the Newry march.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6 —North Vietnam says that American prisoners of war will be released only when the United States has withdrawn its support from the administration of President Nguyen Van Thieu in Saigon and the war has been brought to an end.
Daniel Ellsberg received a world citizenship and national patriotism award here last night from the Lawyer's Committee on American Policy Towards Vietnam.
LONDON, Feb. 6—When Senator Edward Kennedy said last October that Northern Ireland was becoming Britain's Vietnam, he outraged a broad spectrum of British opinion. The xountry's largest‐selling paper, The Daily Mirror, spoke for leaders of both parties when it said his call for withdrawal of British troops from Ulster was irresponsible, contemptible, mindless, asinine twaddle.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 7 (AP)—Enemy forces carried out brief rocket attacks today in the Central Highlands. American and South Vietnamese officials have been predicting a North Vietnamese offensive, this month.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Feb. 7 (AP)—North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops continued their attacks on Cambodian positions less than two miles from the temples at Angkor. The Cambodian command reported one Cambodian soldier killed and 10 wounded at a forward post near Siemreap, a former tourist center three miles from the ruins, which are Cambodia's most precious art treasures.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7 — A leading White House official, H. R. Haldeman, has charged that critics of President Nixon's latest Vietnam peace plan were “consciously aiding and abetting the enemy of the United States.”
SAIGON, Tuesday, Feb. (AP)—President Thieu, apparently annoyed by what he considers United States efforts to impose a Vietnam peace settlement, has told American officials that any proposals dealing with South Vietnam's political future put forth at the Paris negotiations must be presented by his government, official sources discoled this morning.
Resumption of secret negotiations undoubtedly is essential if the Vietnam war is to be ended. But an informed public opinion in the United States and the vigorous discussion now under way are equally important to keep the negotiations above board. The open debate between Hanoi and Washington is contributing to that end. The latest Rogers‐Xuan Thuy exchange, on top of earlier revelations about last year's secret talks, has put Americans in a better position than ever before to judge the private negotiating positions of both sides.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Feb, (AP)—North Vietnamese troops reportedly overran a Government outpost in southern Laos early today as part of a drive to protect the western flank of their supply‐trail network.
Kenneth Rush, the United States Ambassador to West Germany for the last two and a half years, said good‐by with a review of the Army's Berlin brigade at Tempelhof Airport in Berlin and a pledge of a continuing American presence in the former German capital. Mr. Rush is returning to the United States to become Deputy Secretary, of Defense.
These days when Henry A. Kissinger, Vietnam, Democratic Presidential candidates and l'affaire Howard Hughes dominate television newscasts, group of viewers in northern Manhattan is being served a very different video menu.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 7—President Nguyen Van Thieu, who agreed to the American peace proposal that includes an offer of his resignation in the expectation that the Communists would never accept it on his terms, is apparently worried that the United States may be taking the offer more seriously.
NINHTINH, South Vietnam. Feb, 2—She is 70 years old and without relatives, and wherever she goes she carries a rusted Sir Walter Raleigh tobacco can to hold the rice she begs to stay alive.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 9 (AP)—Enemy gunners fired more than 25 rockets into the big United States air base at Danang and the surrounding city early today, killing three persons and wounding 17, the allied commands said.
The charge by White House “chief of staff” H. R. Haldeman that unnamed critics of President Nixon's latest peace proposals are “consciously aiding and abetting the enemy” is, in the context in which it was made, a vicious smear. It strikingly recalls the hysterical, irresponsible cry of treason that paralyzed public debate and policy‐making in the dark days of the late Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8—The State Department today discounted suggestions of disagreement between the United States and President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam over negotiating flexibility on the latest allied peace proposal.
Dr. Andrew W. Cordier, former president of Columbia University, has announced plans to resign in June 30 as dean of the university's School of International Affairs.
HUE, South Vietnam, Feb. 6— The charred nameplate from a Ford truck was tacked above a neatly lettered sign saying, in Vietnamese, “Burn American cars to avenge the people.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 8—Bob Haldeman, the most private member of President Nixon's growing White House politburo, has finally surfaced on N.B.C.'s early morning “Today” show, and even a casual study of his clumsy prose suggests that he should have stayed in bed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Feb. 10—The United States aircraft carrier Constellation joined the carriers Coral sea and Hancock off the coast of Vietnam this morning, bolstering naval air forces in the Gulf of Tonkin to the level maintained at the height of the Indochina war in the late 1960's, according to a spokesman for the United States Seventh Fleet here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 9 (AP)—President Nguyen Van Thieu has reiterated his opposition to Communist political activity in South Vietn a m.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—Using his strongest terms on the subject to date, President Nixon pledged today to retrieve the American prisoners of war held by North Vietnam “either as part of an over‐all settlement, or through other means.”
President Nixon's revelation of the exploits of Professor Kissinger (and I have no desire to minimize them even though we do not yet know whether his efforts were successful) avoided any mention of the gentleman with long and distinguished experience in diplomacy whom the President called out of well‐earned retirement to sit in Paris at the Vietnam peace table.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—President Nixon asked his Democratic challengers for the Presidency today to say nothing that “might give the enemy an incentive to prolong the war until after the election.”
The report to the Congress on President Nixon's foreign policy is described by Henry Kissinger, its chief author, as “a framework for a debate on foreign policy in this country.” And, he adds, “we would welcome a debate.” The challenge is unlikely to be ignored. But it confronts the Democrats with serious difficulties.’ In what is essentially a campaign document for the 1972 Presidential election, Mr. Nixon can be seen between the lines relishing the extent to which he has stolen the opposition's shirt.
SANTA BARBARA, Calif.—The 1,000‐sortie bombing raids which President Nixon ordered against North Vietnam extended into Thanhhoa Province only one hundred miles from Hanoi. “Military targets,” the President's spokesman said—the same terminology used during the three and a half years of Mr. Johnson's bombing of the North.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—The state of the world—or at least the state of American foreign policy—is portrayed in fairly bright hues in President Nixon's third annual dissertation on the subject.
I wonder how many Americans are fooled by the oratorical flim‐flam of those Democratic leaders in the Congress who supported the war in Southeast Asia when Democratic Presidents committed our troops, who backed appropriations for its continuance and who are now so saintly horrified at the situation they helped to create.
An American correspondent who reesntly returned from a two‐week trip to North Vietnam has charged that American planes bombed a North Vietnamese hospital compound on Dec. 26 near Thanhhoa, a city 80 miles south of Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9 (AP) —Administration sources reported today that the United States was moving to reinforce its B‐52 force in the Western Pacific to protect the remaining American troops in Vietnam in the event of an enemy offensive.
TOKYO, Friday, Feb. 11 (UPI)—Japan has dispatched two diplomats to Hanoi in the first official mission sent to North Vietnam by the Japanese Government, the Foreign Office said today. Government sources said the move was undertaken with the knowledge and cooperation of the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10—President Nguyen Van Thieu, in an interview broadcast over the Government television network tonight, affirmed that the latest eight‐ point allied peace proposal was as much as he would be willing to concede and criticized Secretary of State William P. Rogers for his statement that the United States would be “flexible.”
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10—President Nixon sought today to reassure President Nguyen Van Thieu about his intentions at the Paris peace talks and simultaneously to warn North Vietnam that the allies would make no new offers until Hanoi responded to his latest proposal.
PARIS, Feb. 10—The United States refused at the Vietnam peace talks here today to agree to a date for the next session. It accused the North Vietnamese of organizing a three‐day rally in nearby Versailles to place “intolerable” pressure on the negotiators.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 (UPI) —A State Department spokesman said today that the Japanese mission had not been requested to undertake any negotiations or discussions on behalf of the United States. He said the Japanese “very kindly kept us informed” throughout, the stay of the two envoys.
The police arrested 10 SOUth Vietnamese students here yesterday on charges of criminal trespass after they forced their way into the offices of the South Vietnamese Consulate, at 866 United Nations Plaza, and held a three‐hour sit‐in.
SAIGON, Feb. 10 (UPI) —The United States command reported today that two Ameritans died in combat in Indochina last week, or three fewer than the week before.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 — Following is the transcript of President Nixon's news conference today, as released by the White House:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10 — Communist forces increased their attacks on South Vietnamese positions in the Central Highlands today, and American fighter‐bombers retaliated with their heaviest air strikes in six months.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 —This is the third week of the bitter public argument between the United States and North Vietnam over the merits of their respective secret peace plans and over what each told the other in two years of onand‐off secret negotiations in Paris. On the American side, this unusual and confusing diplomatic duel has already personally engaged President Nixon on four oc casions — from his surprise speech Jan. 25, when he divulged the existence of the secret talks and the rival secret peace proposals, to his surprise news conference today. It has also engaged the President's chief foreign policy adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, Secretary of State William P. Rogers, Xuan Thuy, Hanoi's chief negotiator, and assorted ambassadors and spokesmen on both sides.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10—Senfor Pentagon officals say that if North Vietnamese forces open a major offensive in the South, as has been widely predicted in Washington and to a lesser extent in Saigon, they expect it to last as long as three months.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 —President Nixon laid down today a sharp challenge to Democratic critics of his Vietnam peace proposals by warning that they might have to share the blame if the Paris negotiations failed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10 (AP)—South Vietnamese police have sealed off the country's biggest orphanage after raid last weekend In which officials say more than 100 draft evaders were arrested.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 11 —The Administration, in an apparent response to criticisms from Senator Hubert H. Humphrey, said today it would try to provide high‐level briefings on Vietnam and other foreign policy problems to Democratic candidates for the Presidency.
MOSCOW, Feb. 11 (UPI)—The Soviet Government said today that President Nixon's eight‐point peace plan was unsatisfactory and that Communist acceptance would mean full capitulation.
VERSAILLES, France, Feb. 11 —One of the biggest international assemblies ever held on Indochina opened here today with expressions of total support for the Vietcong and North Vietnamese positions. There was also condemnation of the United States refusal yesterday to agree to a date for the next session of peace talks because of the “intolerable” pressure of the assembly.
Negotiated Settlement
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 11 — American fighterbombers and B‐52 heavy bombers continued their intensified air strikes against enemy positions and supply lines in South Vietnam today, the United States command announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 11 (AP)—United States sources said tonight that 10 Filipinos captured by the Vietcong last August, reportedly after their boat washed ashore in a storm off the South Vietnamese coast, had been released.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb. 13—An intense United States bombing campaign against Communist base areas along the Laotian‐South Vietnamese border entered its fifth day today as the United Statees command reported the heaviest American air raids in South Vietnam in two years.
VERSAILLES, Feb. 12 (AP)—American antiwar delegates called tonight for international support for seven weeks of demonstrations in the United States against the war in Vietnam and against the Nixon Administration.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 12—The issue of the United States moral responsibility for war crimes committed by its allies has been raised in letters published in the February issue of the Foreign Service Journal.
In his attempt last week to reassure President Thieu about his intentions in the Vietnam peace talks, President Nixon perhaps inadvertently undercut hope that his recently publicized peace plan might lead to fruitful negotiations.
An unemployed Vietnam veteran asked guidance on openjog a street‐corner hot dog stand, two brothers from New Jersey sought advice on developing their land upstate for; growing grapes and two other brothers who install intercoms in factories wondered why their burgeoning young business was $80,000 in the red despite revenues of $375,000 in two years.
WASHINGTON, Feb; 12 (UPI) —Senator M. Kennedy said today that he favored amnesty for men who fled the United States to avoid serving in the Vietnam war. He said such a policy would serve to unite the country “in the wake of one of the most unfortunate chapters in American history:”
“AU r the candidates for the Presidency have a right to say what they want but I am suggesting now that we have made a proposal that fair, it is forthcoming, it should be negotiated on, and the responsibility for the enemy's failing to negotiate may have to be borne by those who encourage the enemy to wait until after the election.”
PARIS, Feb. 12—The indefinite postponement of the Paris peace talks by the United States in protest against a threeday antiwar assembly in Versailles is understood to constitute a warning to North Vietnam that Washington is losing interest in the weekly meetings.
SAIGON, Feb. 12 (AP)—The Hanoi radio reported today that two United States warplanes were shot down over North Vietnam Thursday and yesterday, but the United States Command said here that it had no reports of any American aircraft lost over the North.
The American Civil Liberties Union, which for nearly 52 years has been defending the rights of others to speak out freely on any issue, now finds, as it undergoes dramatic change, critics attacking its own right to take stands on such issues as the war in Vietnam.
To the Editor:
TOKYO, Feb. I2—A Japanese mission to Hanoi is being interpreted —as a move more in Japan's economic self‐interest than an effort to help President Nixon achieve a political settlement in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 12 (AP) —Current United States intelligence estimates indicate that both the Soviet Union and China stepped up their economicl and arms aid to North Vietnam over the last year.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 12 (UPI)—The Korean Defense Minister, Yu Jae Hung, apparently has reached a tentative agreement with South Vietnam to leave some or all of about 40,000 Korean troops in this country for another two years, spokesman said today. Mr. Yu, who flew back to Seoul today after a four‐day visit here, was quoted by the spokesmen as saying he had “reached a good understanding” with President Nguyen Van Thieu.
That is a tough proposition President Nixon has laid down for his Democratic Presidential challengers: Go ahead and criticize my Vietnam peace proposals if you must, but you make Hanoi think it can make better deal with you after the election, you will get the blame for prolonging the war until then.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 14—One of the heaviest American bombing campaigns of the war was concentrated over the weekend on base areas and infiltration trails west of the Central Highlands city of Kontum. Enemy attacks throughout South Vietnam declined yesterday for the third consecutive day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 13 (AP)—Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker returned to Saigon today after 12 days of consultations in Washington and Paris.
To the Editor:
LONGTHANH VILLAGE, South Vietnam, Feb. 13—South Vietnam's largest orphanage was silent today following a police action Friday during which the orphanage was shut and nearly 3,000 Vietnamese children were carried away In trucks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 13—With the Tot holiday beginning tomorrow evening, American and South Vietnamese officials have become visibly nervous with the discovery of what they say are increasing signs of an impending major Communist offensive.
Modern or Medieval Men?
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Feb. 13 —North Vietnam considered, and then set aside, secret Miffed States peace offers in 1965, well placed informants have now disclosed.
VERSAILLES, Feb. 13—Plans for a six‐week campaign, beginning April 1, by peace groups in the United States to end the Indochina war on terms laid down by North Vietnam and the Vietcong received pledges of international support here today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 13 (UPI) —Vice President Agnew said today that, although Democratic Presidential candidates may not have been doing it consciously, their criticism has undermined President Nixon's Vietnam peace proposal.
SAIGON, Feb. 15 (UPI)—President Nguyen Van Thieu today opened the celebrations of Tet, the Lunar New Year, with a prayer for peace in Vietnatn and renewed opposition to any plan that would “sacrifice” the nation to the Communists.
BAL HARBOUR, Fla., Feb. 14 —Top leaders of the A.F.LCIO. attacked the economic control program of the Nixon Administration today, calling it “unfair” and “weighted” against lower‐paid workers.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 14 —The policy‐making body of B'nai B'rith—itself split on the issue—voted today to solicit the views of its 500,000‐member constituency on the question of extending amnesty to Vietnam war evaders.
A 43‐year‐old Californian, called from Saigon, where he serves as a political officer at the United States Embassy, to accompany President to China Great‐grandfather was an officer with the British Pacific Fleet along the China coasts in 1800 In Tientsin as a Marine Corps private first class in 1945 and 1946, helping with repatriation of Japanese soldiers Holds master's degree in Chinese studies from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies Served in American Embassy in Taipei, then attended the United States language school at Taichung, Taiwan, learning Mandarin In 1962, served as interpreter at meetings between the United States and Chinese Ambassadors in Warsaw Later worked on Chinese affairs in the State Department and studied Chinese and Vietnamese history
President Thieu's repressive national police have written another ugly chapter in the annals of Vietnamization with their recent assault on and subsequent dismemberment of an alleged hotbed of antiwar and anti‐Government activity—South Vietnam's largest orphanage Longthanh Village, near Saigon.
Wearing an embroidered blue 15th‐century vestment, Prof. J. Robert Wright sat at the foot of a catafalque in the Cloisters in Fort Tryon Park yesterday and received, in turn, a figurine, the flags of North and South Vietnam, two bayonets and two caged mourning cloves.
There Was high praise In New Haven for Michael Casey, a Vietnam veteran who was named winner of Yale University's 1971 Younger Poets competition. Stanley Kunitz, the Pulitzer Prize‐winning poet who judged the competition's 700 entries, said that Mr. Casey ‘'invented a new poetic idiom out of G. I. lingo, for which he has a matchless ear.” He added: “This book by an unknown Is the first important work of imagination to come out of the war in Vietnam.” Yale will publish the book by Mr. Casey, a 25‐year‐old physicist, in May. It's called “Ob
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 15 — Heavy American bombing of two enemy base areas along the Laotian and Cambodian borders continued yesterday through the first day of a four‐day ceasefire proclaimed by the Communists.
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
HARRISBURG, Pa., Feb. 15; (AP)—Two men who said they were against all wars were accepted today as tentative alternate jurors at the conspiricy trial of the Rev. Philip F. Berrigan and six other opponents of the Vietnam conflict. Their selection in an abbreviated court session brought to 13 the number who have passed preliminary screening as alternates. Six alternates will be chosen when the number of qualified prospects reaches 16.
PARIS, Feb. 15 (AP)—The United States and South Vietnam formally advised the Communist side at the Vietnam peace talks today of their refusal to attend a conference session this week and left up in the air when they would participate again.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15—High‐ranking sources report that the decision to bomb Communist base areas at the border of Laos and South Vietnam was based on intelligence reports showing that more North Vietnamese troops were moving south this month than in any previous month.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15 (AP)—United States 8‐52 bombers resumed their attacks in South Vietnam today shortly after the end of a 24‐hour allied cease‐fire for Tet, the Lunar New Year.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 16 —Results of the latest Gallup Poll, which were released today, showed that 53 per cent of 1,450 persons polled said they approved “of the way Nixon is handling the Presidency.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 17—The United States command here announced this morning that it had undertaken a “limited‐duration” bombing campaign against North Vietnamese artillery positions in the southern province of North Vietnam and in the northern half of the demilitarized zone, which straddles the border between North and South Vietnam.
PARIS, Feb, 16—North Vietnam and the Vietcong protested today against the refusal of the United States to hold a meeting tomorrow and accused Washington of trying to “sabotage” the peace talks.
As Mr. Nixon reaches the orangetiled tranquility of Peking, what frame of mind will he find his hosts in? Rather buoyant, above all. The Chinese feel less threatened, as they look out from their backward but proud nation, than five years ago when the Vietnam war was at its peak, or twenty years ago when Korea was in flames.
OKLAHOMA CITY, Feb. 16 (AP) — A 60‐member Roman Catholic parish has voted unanimously to withhold payment of long distance telephone excise taxes in protest of the Vietnam war. The Rev. William Nerin said the decision by the Community of John XXIII was made about six months ago but announcement was delayed until the beginning of Lent, “a time of reflection.”
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Feb. 16—When Pvt. But Van Au left his native village near Hanoi last fall to begin the long march to South Vietnam, he says, his parents and relatives cried for a long time. For no soldier from their village had over returned after infiltrating into the South.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 16—Mrs. Nguyen Thi Quy, a middle‐class housewife, refuses to even mention the Communist offensive four years ago during Tot. She was upset by the idea of speaking about it during the three‐day Lunar New Year holiday, which began yesterday.
VANG VIENG, Laos, Feb. 11 — Barney Chessin, a community‐development adviser employed by the United States Agency for International Development, does not think that Laos is much of a place for community development because of the Vietnam war.
SAN DIEGO, Feb. 17 (AP) —Nine young sailors who refused to leave for Vietnam with their ships were taken into custody today and flown by helicopter to the carrier Kitty Hawk at sea.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 18 —One hundred twenty five American warplanes, flying through a barrage of surface‐to‐air missiles and antiaircraft fire, completed a 29‐hour series of attacks on artillery and air defense sites in and just north of the demilitarized zone yesterday, the United, States command announced.
SAIGON, Feb. 17 (UPI)—Two American soldiers were killed in action last week, bringing to 21 the number of United States combat deaths in Indochina this year, the United States command reported today.
To the Editor:
MELBOURNE, Fla., Feb. 17—Two of the issues—one domestic. one foreign—that are likely to dominate the political dialogue of 1972 have been set dramatically before the public in the last two weeks.
SEOUL, South Korea, Feb. 17 —Defense Minister Yu Jac Heung said today that South Korea would decide by the end of March on Saigon's request for the continued stationing of two Korean Army divisions in South Vietnam until the end of 1973.
CAMDEN, N. J., Feb. 18 (AP)—A Roman Catholic priest was removed from his church post today for conducting an antiwar Ash Wednesday service at a cemetery here.
Thor Heyerdahl, the Norwegian explorer whose most recent feat was crossing the Atlantic in a papyrus boat in 57 clays, said in Tel Aviv that he plans another such journey in a vessel to be built along lines of a ship depicted on an ancient Assyrian clay tablet.
Gus Hall, the general secretary of the Communist party, U.S.A., and its candidate for President, yesterday decried President Nixon's trip to China and China's Communist chairman, Mao Tse‐tung, as the party opened its 20th national convention here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 18 (Al') — The United States command reported today that its fighter‐bombers smashed at two enemy convoys in the Central Highlands in the course of nearly 150 raids on enemy targets in South Vietnam.
HONG KONG, Feb. 18 —Peking accused the Nixon Administration today of continuing policies of “aggression and war.”
Nearly 1,000 people attended a rally of the national convention of the Communist party, U.S.A., at Town Hall yesterday, singing “We Shall Not Be Moved,” jesting about a Communist electoral victory this fall and listening to a Chilean Communist Senator.
HONG KONG, Sunday, Feb. 20—China issued tough new statements condemning United States actions in Vietnam on the eve of President Nixon's arrival in Peking tomorrow.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb. 20 (AP)—Communistled forces launched a series of attacks in South Vietnam yesterday and today, handing Government forces some of their worst setbacks in several moot hs.men, killing six and wounding 16, military spokesmen said. A railroad bridge was reported destroyed. Three Government soldiers were reported missing. Enemy losses were not known.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 15—”As long as God makes elephants,” the old man said, “God will make grass for them to eat.”
SCOTCH PLAINS, N.J., Feb. 19 — Mr. and Mrs. Charles E. Pett Jr. have announced the engagement of their daughter, Miss Lynn Frances Pett, to Specialist 5 Peter Charles Stickle, who is stationed with the Army in Vietnam. He is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles W. Stickle Jr. of Baldwin, L. I.
HANOI — As President Nixon begins his state visit to the People's Republic of China, the people of neighboring North Vietnam are looking the other way.
To the Editor:
HANOI, North Vietnam, Feb. 19—North Vietnamese officials today presented five captured American fliers before newsmen and diplomats at the International Club here.
To the Editor:
Sidney Lens, co‐chairman of the New Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam, seeks to debunk the myth of America the benevolent, and to show instead a United States that has never been antiwar, anti‐imperialist or anticolonialist. The question is: Does the job need doing? Where, outside 25‐year‐old grade‐school textbooks, does the “benevolent” myth now find a home? Certainly not in the long list of highly regarded and widely read historical studies of the United States from 1789 to the present that are Mr. Lens's principal sources, and which he has sedulously combed, digested and paraphrased. Had he dug up new material or offered fresh insights, the book might have been worth writing and publishing. As it is, it's a restatement of the well known
QUINHON, South Vietnam, Feb. 1—Col. Nguyen Van Chuc, the newly appointed chief of Binlidinh Province—considered the most pro‐Communist and unpacified of the 44 provinces of South Vietnam—likes to give briefings on how yoga can end the Indochina war.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 21 (AP)—Communist‐led forces shelled three United States air bases, shot down two helicopters and damaged four others in a surge of action yesterday and today.Two Americans were killed and 10 wounded, the United States command announced. The two Americans who were killed were involved in a helicopter action 25 miles northwest of Saigon.
LONDON, Feb. 20 — President Nixon's visit to China, whatever else it may or may not do, marks the end of an illusory phase in American. Policy. Instead of applying a devil theory to the People's Republic, we now admit to ourselves that it has legitimate national concerns—and in my case is there to stay. In short, we have stopped fooling ourselves that we have the power to fight history in that part of Asia.
PEKING— Understanding an interview with Premier Chou En‐lai is like trying to piece a jigsaw puzzle together. One knows the creator had some design, but while the puzzle is in pieces it helps measurably to have previously seen a picture of the puzzle. As the pieces are put in place, at some point patterns become recognizable. From then on, one has increasing confidence in being able to put the remaining pieces in place.tion should be solved first,” Chou and his subordinates repeatedly gave the impression that they did not wish to talk about the Vietnam war and that its termination was for the UnitedStates the Vietnamese to settle. Second, if, on the other hand, Mr. Nixon comes to China hoping for support from the: Chinese to maneuver their Vietnamese allies into a settlement acceptable to the Nixon Administration, he will leave empty‐handed. If the Chinese are not going to mix in to apply maximum ‘diplomatic leverage on Mr. Nixon to end the war, neitherare they about to sell out their, allies. And third, the immediate health of the antiwar movement in the United States, is of relatively minor concern to the Chinese, who, believe. that the war will be settled primarily; in Viet‐. nim. Chinese disinterest may be a product of the severely weakened'state of the United States antiwar movement, and it is rationalized in terms of China's professed faith in the perseverance of the American movement and China's historical belief in the inevitable victory of that movement, whatever the current twists and turns.
`Vietnamization’ of Voters
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Feb. 21—The South Vietnamese commander in the Central Highlands said today that the expected Tet offensive in the highlands has been delayed for at least several weeks by a combination of intensive American air strikes and the capture of some guerrillas with important assignments.
SAIGON, Feb. 21—American and South Vietnamese officials who predicted a major Communist offensive here during President Nixon's visit to Peking are now saying that it was prevented by timely allied bombing.
HONG KONG, Feb. 21 (Reuters)—North Korea published a bitter denunciation today of President Nixon as the American leader arrived in China, North Korea's neighbor and closest ally.
United States Communists will not call.themselves.“Americans” any more in party statements, a spokesman reported yesterday as the Communist party, U. S. A., closed its fourday 20th annual convention at the Towers Hotel in Brooklyn.
NOTTINGHAM, N. FL, Feb. 21 —On Sept. 24, 1963, George McGovern of South Dakota had bean a member of the United States Senate for less than year. His friend John F. Kennedy was still President, and there were only 15,000 American military advisers in South Vietnam. Nonetheless, in a Senate speech that day, Mr. McGovern categorically denounced the United States’ involvement in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 21 (UPI)—A total of 4,100 American servicemen left Vietnam last week, reducing the number of Americans still in the war zone to 127,100, the United States command said today. It said the current strength was the lowest since August, 1965.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 22 (AP)—American fighter‐bombers shot down a MIG‐21 interceptor over northern Laos yesterday and made four attacks in North Vietnam, knocking out at least four antiaircraft guns in fresh surge of aerial engagements, the United States command announced today.
SAIGON, south Vietnam, Wednesday Feb. 23—The Saigon police refused to allow former Suoth Vietnamese army commander to return from exile in the United States today, and ordered the Pan American 747 jumbo jet on which arrived to leave without 200 homeward bound G.I.'s.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 23 (AP)—Enemy troops harassed South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands yesterday and shelled the big United States Army support compound at Quinhon, the United States command reported today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 22—Two days after President Nixon's arrival in China, the North Vietnamese population apparently remains unaware of it—unless individual citizens have heard the news on the Peking radio or other broadcasts.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23—President Nixon's visit to Peking has not aroused intense! interest here except among! politicians, most of whom are welcoming it cautiously in the hope that somehow it will shorten the Vietnam war. But, President Nguyen Van Thieu is! known to be worried.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 — A former senior South Vietnamese Army commander with ties to the anti‐Government Buddhists was barred from returning from exile in the United States today because President Nguyen Van Thieu apparently feared he might become a focus for increased opposition.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 (UPI)—Tran Van Do said in a telephone interview today that he did not “think the meeting accomplished much.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 (AP)—Enemy troops continued small rocket and mortar assaults on military positions and villages today in the Central Highlands, near Saigon and in the Mekong Delta.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 23 (UPI) —Senator J. W. Filbright said today that he felt President Nixon's trip to China could help end the Vietnam war.
PARIS, Feb. 23—The North vietnamese delegation to the peace talks confirmed today that Xuan Thuy, the delegation chief, had met Tran Van Do, the former South Vietnamese Foreign Minister, for two hours on Dec. 19.
SAIGON, South ,Vietnam, Friday Feb. 25 (AP)—Battlefield action tapered yesterday across South. Vietnam, with enemy gunners concentrating their shelling on military positions in the Central Highlands.
HONG KONG, Feb. 24 (AP)—North Vietnam made its first comment on President Nixon's visit to China today and it was an adverse one that did not mention China by name.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 —President Nguyen Van Thieu asserted in an interview today that the Soviet Union had urged North Vietnam to open a military offensive here to block any efforts by the United States and China to end the Vietnam war during President Nixon's Peking talks. However, he said, South Vietnamese Army attacks and United States bombing kept the threat from materializing.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 24 —Japan was reported today to have refused an American request that she refrain from sending her first official mission to North Vietnam this month. The American objection was said to be that it might embarrass President Nixon during his visit to China.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—There is a widespread habit of blaming almost every symptom of instability in the United States upon the Vietnam war and notable among such symptoms have been rising race tensions, violence among university students and an alarming rise in the use of drugs. But whether this diagnosis is accurate, whether the sick American chicken hatched the rotten Vietnamese egg or vice versa, is questionable.
SAIGON, Feb. 24 (UPI)—The United States command said today that two Americans were killed in Indochina action last week—the same number as in the previous week—while ‘both South Vietnamese and enemycasualties decreased.
In a rare display of generosity, each of the commercial networks has scheduled something worthwhile for this evening.
Most Americans approve of President Nixon's visit to China, according to the Louis Harris Poll. In a nationwide survey of 1,480 households between Feb. 8 and 14, the poll reported Wednesday, 78 per cent though the visit was good idea. The poll noted that. 62 per cent of those questioned did not agree with the statement that “the war in Vietnam will come to an end faster” because of the trip.
PARIS, Feb. 24—The Communist delegations walked out of a session of the Vietnam peace talks today in protest against American bombing of North Vietnam. This is the first time that one side has walked Out on the other.
Dr. George Wald, a Haryard professor of biology and winner of the Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine in 1967, arrived here yesterday with 86 letters from prisoners of war in North Vietnam: He said that It was “a cruel deception” for Washington to foster the belief that there might be more alive but unlisted.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 24 (UPI)—The National Liberation Front, or Vietcong, in its first comment on President Nixon's visit to China, accused him today of trying to capitalize on the internal disagreements of the socialist camp—a reference to the split between China and the Soviet Union.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23—The morale of American troops in South Vietnam is in “excellent shape” and the incidence of addiction to hard drugs has’ declined approximately 50 per cent, according to Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the United States commander.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 26 (AP) — About 100 United States air cavalrymen, pursuing two enemy soldiers along a trail, ran into heavily fortified bunker line 42 miles east of Saigon yesterday, setting off a five‐hour battle.
SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 25 (UPI) — Lieut. Comdr. Marcus Aurelius Arnheiter sued Neil Sheehan, the author of “The Arnheiter Affair,” for $5‐million today, charging that the book was unfair and inaccurate. The suit, filed in United States District Court, also named Random House, the book's publisher, and The New York Times, for which Mr. Sheehan is a reporter, as defendants. Commander Arnheiter, an Annapolis graduate who is now retired, was relieved as captain of the destroyer escort Vance on March 31, 1966, while the vessel was on patrol off Vietnam. The Navy said the action, was taken because of the commander's “bad judgment and lack of integrity.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 25 (UPI) —The United States Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., arrived here today for a three‐day routine visit, Navy spokesmen said.
MOSCOW, Feb. 25—The Soviet Defense Ministry charged today that Chinese military spending had reached an alltime high, amounting to about a third of Peking's over‐all budget, and said that Western nations supply the Chinese with strategic materials even for the production of nuclear weapons.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 (AP) —The State Department acknowledged today that discussions were held with Tokyo on the timing of a Japanese Foreign Ministry mission to Hanoi earlier this month.
PARIS, Feb. 25—The United States retaliated today against yesterday's walkout by the Vietnamese Communists by, refusing to agree to meet for peace talks next week.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Feb. 26—On a cool evening in Paris last December, Dr. Tran Van; Do, the courtly former Foreign Minister of South Vietnam, ‘,walked into the suburban villa rented by the Government of North Vietnam.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 26 (UPI)—A North Vietnamese broadcast said today that President Nixon was trying to split the Communist camp by negotiating with Peking and Moscow. It. said the result could be oppression of small nations.
TULSA, Okla., Feb. 26—The Vietnam Veterans Against the War has drafted plans for massive demonstrations during the Republican convention in August at San Diego.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—President Nixon's policy of Vietnamizing the war here must inescapably lead to Vietnamizing the peace—unless some formula for settlement is found before them
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 26 (Reuters)—The United States Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Elmo N. Zumwalt Jr. said today that American warships would stay in the Gulf of Tonkin as long as it was necessary to protect United States troops in South Vietnam.
The communique issued in Shanghai by President Nixon and Premier Chou En‐lai is an agreement to disagree on many points, while clearing the way for future negotiations on the outstanding issues. It is a renunciation of force, in favor of diplomacy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 27 (Reuters)—American casualties in Vietnam during the last week reached their highest reported level of 1972.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 28—Saigon's initial reaction to the communique issued at the end of President Nixon's visit to China last night was cautious. But ‘officials were suspicious and anxious to learn if the Americans had made any concessions to the Chinese not covered in, the communiqué.
SAIGON. South Vietnam. Monday. Feb. 28 (AP)—South Vietnamese forces battled Communist‐led troops on three fronts yesterday in tough fighting that took a total of nearly 100 casualties on both sides, the Saigon command announced today.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27 —American forces on Taiwan, reported to number 8,000 to 9,000, are there to help defend the Chinese Nationalist refuge and they also support American troops in Vietnam operation. That presumably will continue to be true as the United States withdraws from Vietnam but the bases may have some use in logistic support of South Vietnamese forces.
SHANGHAI, Feb. 27 (AP)—Follow ing is the text of the communiqué issued today at the conclusion of the meetings between President Nixon and Premier Chou En‐lai:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 28—The Supreme Court agreed today to decide if radio and television broadcasters may constitutionally refuse to sell time to noncommercial advertisers who wish to broadcast their views on controversial issues.
TANCANH, South Vietnam — Although Tancanh is only 20 miles from a major Communist base area on the Cambodian border and is often hit by rockets, American helicopter pilots who fly over large areas of the country, compete for a chance to stop here.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 28 (AP) — The Selective Service director, Curtis W. Tarr, told Senators today that granting amnesty to Vietnam war draft resisters would be unfair and set a dangerous precedent.
PARIS, Feb. 28—The North Vietnamese and Vietcong delegations at the peace talks here refrained today from commenting on the results of President Nixon's trip to China.
NASHUA, N. H., Feb. 28 (AP) —Representative Paul N. McClosky Jr., Republican of California, said today that he would not support President Nixon for re‐election “as long as the bombing is continuing in Vietnam.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 28—”We felt at ease,” said a senior official of the South Vietnamese Foreign Ministry, describing his colleagues’ initial reaction to the Chinese‐American communiqué from Shanghai.
ANCHORAGE, Feb. 28—President Nixon returns from his “long march”—an arduous retreat that in Chinese Communist history became a legendary victory—urgently offering the American people the claim that he is, after all, the great peacemaker, that he has found his mission for four more years, in the White House, that he has overwhelmed the agony of Vietnam with the promise of reconciliation in China and that the youth of America, which never suffered his own fierce hatred of Communism, has reason to celebrate the new China lobby led by the new Nixon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 28 (AP)—The South Vietnamese command announced today the beginning of its third thrust into Cambodia this month to block the infiltration of enemy soldiers into South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, March 1 (AP) —An American fighter‐bomber attacked a North Vietnamese missile site yesterday 40 miles north of the demilitarized zone along the line between the two Vietnams.

PUSAN, South Korea, Feb. 29 —The first phase of the withdrawal of South Korean forces from Vietnam was ‘ completed today when the last contingent of the Blue Dragon marine brigade landed at the port here. Their departure reduced the South Korean strength in Vietnam to about 38,000, most of them serving in two infantry divisions.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 24—He is 9 years old and he hobbles around this bedraggled port on two wooden stubs and a tiny crutch. His name is Bay.
To the Editor:
Edward R. Egan, the former New York City detective whose exploits were recounted in the hit movie “The French Connection,” was depicted as the target of “a, campaign of smear and harassment” ‘in State Supreme Court. The occasion was the opening of his lawsuit for reinstatement with the rank of detective first grade and retirement with a commensurate pension.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb 29 — For Saigon's large Chinese community, which controls some three‐quarters of South Vietnam's major business and industry, President Nixon's trip, to Peking brought deep anxiety and a feeling that the time may have come to begin shifting its political loyalties from Nationalist to.Communist China.
WASHINGTON, March 1—The statements on TaiWan, Vietnam and other sensitive issues in the communique, issued by President Nixon and Premier Chou En‐lai, altholigh presented as divergent declaretions by each side, had actually been subjected to some intensive negotiation between them, an Administration official said today.
I guess It began over a year ago with ominous rumbling and editorial‐gnashing of teeth by Young Americans for Freedom, Human Events, The American Conservative Union and National Review. Despite the tactical lesson of Vietnam, you used the discredited approach of escalation—the graduated political response. Richard the Apostate was chided, derided and, finally, tentatively excommunicated by you, as spokesmen for the unelected conservative elite, many of you respected political thinkers, few of you practical
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 1—In South Vietnam's first official reaction to President Nixon's China trip, Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam said today that his Government approved of the final Washington‐Peking communique and felt it upheld American commitments to his country.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 2 (AP)—United States fighter‐bombers dueled with two Communist MIG‐21 interceptors along the North Vietnam‐Laos border 125 miles southwest of Hanoi last night, the United States Command said today, and the American pilots reported the probable destruction of one of the MIG's.
LOS ANGELES, March 1 —Pretrial hearings indicate that the trial of Dr. Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony J. Russo Jr. will result in a detailed debate by expert witnesses on some of the critical sections of the Pentagon papers, the Defense Department study; of American involvement In Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, March 1 (AP) — Amnesty for Vietnam draft resisters and deserters was opposed today by the Pentagon and the American Legion. They said it could wreck the armed forces and defame the millions who served honorably and without protest.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 1 (UPI)—A North Vietnamese shell hit a Laotian ammunition dump on a ridge near the beleaguered base of Long Tieng yesterday and the resultant explosion wounded 23 men, military sources said today.
FIRE BASE BALDY, South Vietnam—“The North Vietnamese are good fighters,” the South Vietnamese Army private said as he shouldered his rucksack and headed for an assault helicopter.
MANCHESTER, N. H., March 2—Senator George McGovern of South Dakota, sensing a surge of support in the New Hampshire Democratic Presidential primary, said again today that he felt voter sentiment in the state was almost evenly divided and indicated that he thought the race might now be neck‐and‐neck.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, March 2 (Reuters)—The United States command ended today the special alert that had confined to barracks all American troops not on essential missions for the last three weeks. South Vietnamese forces, however, remained on partial alert.
SAIGON, March 2 (UPI)—The weekly casualty, report issued by the United States command said today that six Americans were killed in action last week, the highest toll thus far this year. This was an increse of four over the previous week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, March 3 (AP)—American fighter‐bombers struck inside North Vietnam and Laos yesterday in exchanges of fire with enemy antiaircraft defenses, and an Air Force light reconnaissance plane was shot down over southern Laos, United States military spokesmen said.
HONG KONG, March 3 —In its first official reaction to President Nixon's China trip, North Vietnam today denounced the American side of the joint Peking communiqué and accused the United States of “sowing discord” among Communist countries.
Saigon, South Vietnam, Saturday, March 4 (AP)—Enemy antiaircraft defense opened fire on two American reconnaissance planes, prompting a new round of United States air strikes in North Vietnam yesterday, the United States command said today.
President Nixon's “journey for peace” has ended but American bombs are still falling throughout Indochina and Communist troops are still massing and maneuvering in South Vietnam for an expected offensive that could pose a formidable challenge to the Vietnamization program.
TEMPE, Ariz, March 4—Mylai is a name few Americans will easily forget. But few Americans are likely to recall the name Ronald Lee Eidenhour, the Vietnam veteran whose singular, year‐long effort exposed the massacre.
SAIGON South Vietnam Sunday, March 5 (AP)—American fighter‐bombers yesterday attacked three antiaircraft artillery sites inside North Vietnam that fired on three unarmed reconnaissance planes the United States command announced today.
KONTUM South Vietnam —Phang does not know why the Vietcong shot him and his friends as they swam in the stream near their village one warm morning last week. He is a slender Montagnard boy of 15, and the Vietcong disappeared into the jungle after they wounded him in the hip.
SANTA. BARBARA, Calif.—Aren't we disengaging from Vietnam? Then why are we still bombing? Isn't bombing an inhumane way of fighting? And isn't it really ineffective?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 1—“It's just not possible to keep people from being afraid that the Government will seize the printing press,” said Ho Ngoc Nhuan, the editor of what used to be Saigon's largest opposition newspaper, Tin Sang.
WASHINGTON, March 4 —Peking is reportedly providing considerable new economic aid to developing countries around the world as well as reactivating suspended programs elsewhere under its increasingly active policy of asserting leadership of the “third world.”
WASHINGTON, March 4—Senator Edward M. Kennedy chairman of the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on refugees said today that the Adminstration Was ignoring humanitarian responsibilities in Vietnam by “sabotaging” and reducing health programs of the war.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 6 (AP)—The South Vietnamese command lost 300 tons of ammunition, including bombs and artillery shells, in an explosion that ripped through a river convoy 10 miles east of Saigon yesterday.
WASHINGTON, March 5 —For the nations of Southeast Asia, other than Vietnam, the communique issued at the end of President Nixon's trip to China contained both good and bad news.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 6 (AP)—Marshall Green, a United States Assistant Secretary of State, briefed President Nguyen Van Thieu today about President Nixon's trip to China.
NEW HAVEN—All wars need lies, but some require that a whole people live in illusion. Though our Government has had increasing difficulty in maintaining the illusions of the Vietnam war, its harassment of ‘suppOrters and sympathizers of the Harrisburg and Pentagon Papers defendants’ Suggests how far:it will go to keep trying.
SAIGON South Vietnam Tuesday March 7—Assistant Secretary of State Marshall Green said today that he had assured South Vietnamese leaders that American, policy toward Vietnam had not been affected by President Nixon's trip to China.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 6 (Reuters)—The Mayor has ordered all bars in downtown Saigon and Cholon closed on instructions from President Nguyen Van Thieu.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass—Let us assume that despite its complexities and perils, the world of tomorrow will lend itself to a balance of power policy between five main, actorsiluid to a skillful and restrained American diplomacy aimed at building a stable, flexible world order around these powers. It is not clear, despite official explanations, that the Nikon Administration really wishes to practice what it praises.
To the Editor: Elias Schwartzbart blithely suggests that “a fundamental land reform program financed by the United States (like that begun in South Vietnam but bigger, better and quicker)” will win us the allegiance: of the Cambodian and Laotian peasantry and ‘hasten our withdrawal [letter March 1] The limits of U.S. power in complex situations have been adequately demonstrated the last ten years or so we need no more grandiose designs but humility.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 6 (AP) — A Laotian Government drive around the Plaine des Jarres in northern Laos has reportedly been called off after encountering increasing counterattacks by North Vietnamese forces.
WASHINGTON, March 6 (AP) —The Supreme Court today refused 7 to 2 to rule on whether the Vietnam war was constitutional, an action it has repeated at least half a dozen times each year since 1967.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Mardi 6 (AP)—Nearly a dozen United States fighter planes and MIG interceptors battled over North Vietnam today. American pilots reported downing one MIG in an exchange of at least eight air‐to‐air missiles.
WASHINGTON, March 7—A Pentagon spokesman said to day that he knew of no change in the policy of announcing the number of planes that take part in strikes in North Vietnam.
The city of Aachen, West Germany, annually gives its Charlemagne Prize, worth $1,560, to a person who has furthered European unity. This year the prize goes to Roy Jenkins, deputy leader of the British Labor party, who broke party discipline to line up with the governing Conservatives to help them gain a majority in the initial vote on entering the Common Market.
PARIS, March 7—The United States and South Vietnam announced today that for the second week in a row they would refuse to meet with North Vietnam and the Vietcong in a plenary session of the Peace talks here.
An American columnist who accompanied President Nixon to China and is still there reports that Chinese and North Vietnamese leaders recently reached a short‐lived agreement that Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam “would go to Paris to push the peace negotia?? with the United States.”
To the Editor: Columnist William is supposed to be the humorous Buckley, but Senator James demonstrates considerable talent in that direction too. His concern [Op‐Ed Feb. 29] that this country mar come to grief in Indochina because of its superabundance of goodwill and utter lack of aggressiveness ought to bring many a merry chuckle to the survivors of Mylai and all the other peasants who have been relocated, defoliated and napalmed.
PARIS, March 7—A Bronx rabbi charged here today that the North Vietnamese had gone back on a promise to allow him to meet and conduct services with Jewish prisoners of war.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., March 7 (AP)—Rennie C. Davis, a Chicago Seven defendant, announced today plans to put 40,000 nonviolent antiwar demonstrators on the streets of Miami Beach during the Democratic National Convention. He said the purpose of the demonstration, which is being coordinated by the Florida People's Coalition, is to commit the Democratic Presidential candidate to an immediate end of the war in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, March 8—Amid reports of continuing heavy American air strikes on North Vietnam, the United States command here said today that it would no longer disclose information on the number of American aircraft involved in the raids.
WASHINGTON, March 7—Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that although Soviet‐American tensions had diminished, relations would continue to show strains until Moscow “overcomes its temptation to exploit explosive situations for national advantage.”
To the Editor: Negotiations with the North Vietnamese may be more serious than The Times editorial of Feb. 3 “The Negotiating Way” suggested; but, chances for progress may find fruition beyond the predictions of the Rand Corporation study by Brian Jenkins titled “Why the North Vietnamese Keep Fighting” and referred to in a letter by Donald Miller on Feb. 14.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 8 (AP) — Ten enemy rocket and mortar attacks were reported today against South, Vietnamese bases guarding the demilitarized zone between North and South Vietnam.
SAIGON, Thursday, March 9 (UPI)—Two United States warplanes have crashed in the jungles of Indochina the United States command said today. One pilot was reported to have been rescued and two others were reported missing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 8 (UPI) — The United States Army announced that starting today it would check arriving as well as departing servicemen for drug abuse.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 9 (AP)—The United States military command, in a reversal of long‐established practice, refused today to permit the daily war briefing to be filmed by television cameras.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 9 — President Nguyen Van Thieu is working slowly and secretly to form a political party that will include not only old‐line politicians but also large numbers of military officers, village leaders and most of the, powerful province chiefs.
WASHINGTON—In a recent column on this page I provided an assessment of the Army as it is today and mentioned briefly some of the measures we are taking to revitalize it as we enter the post‐Vietnam era.
WASHINGTON, March 9—Authoritative reports received today by the United States Government said that Premier Chou En‐lai of China secretly visited Hanoi last weekend to acquaint the North Vietnamese leadership with the highlights of his conversations with President Nixon.
HONG KONG, Friday, March 10—Peking today made its first attack on “U.S. imperialism” since President Nixon's visit to China by issuing a strong, formal denunciation of recent American bombings of North Vietnam and reiterating all‐out support for Communist‐led forces in Indochina.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 9 (AP)—United States fighter‐bombers raided antiaircraft positions in North Vietpam yesterday for the eighth successive day, the United States command reported today.
Maya Angelou, the black-author-actress-singer-poet who is making her debut as a screenwriter, along with Diana Sands and the rest of the interracial cast of "Georgia, Georgia," which opened yesterday at the Forum, cannot be faulted for lack of purpose and sincerity.They speak with passionate feeling about the stark state of blacks in a world of terrible misunderstanding and dissension. But their emotions are, sadly enough, too often projected in rhetoric and surface histrionics rather than drama.Miss Sands, in the role of an American pop singing star on a concert tour in Stockholm, is caught up in the genuine ecstacy of a love affair with a white, expatriate American photographer. She is also dependent on but dislikes her militantly black, mother-figure of a maid-companion and her homosexual, black manager. And she is constantly importuned by a group of black G.I. deserters from Vietnam who want her help in enlisting sympathy for them back home.These frighteningly real issues are couched in explicit, with-it dialogue, but they are for the most part merely stated, often stridently, and not resolved. Miss Angelou's unexpected, shocking climactic scene, involving Miss Sands and her companion, appears to be not so much of a resolution of the film or her tortured heroine's problems as simply a melodramatic device.Credit Miss Sands with a finely tuned performance as the troubled entertainer desperately seeking identity in her hectic surroundings. She may be, as one of the principals wrly says, a cool, superior type who has "just about kicked the habit" of being black.But she is also the lonely success who, detesting her companion, still needs in private her mammy-like lullabies and ministrations. And she is a woman suddenly and defiantly in love.Dirk Benedict, now on Broadway in "Butterflies Are Free," makes his film debut with a sensitive, restrained performance as a young man in love. Minnie Gentry of Broadway's "Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death" is forcefully natural as the officious maid-companion consumed by hatred of whites.Along with other actual black deserters, Terry Whitmore, the G. I. subject of a 1969 documentary about his desertion, gives reality, though not much impact, to the proceedings. And Roger Furman, as the homosexual manager, gives a merely conventional performance.Stig Bjorkman, the film's young Swedish director, has competently kept the story and cast moving briskly against the colorful background of Stockholm, where the film was shot. But the basic, essentially important source material provided by Miss Angelou is too often simplistic and only occasionally memorable.
WASHINGTON, March 10 —Even before the ink dried In Albany this week on the maps of the state's new Congressional districts, a number of House members were already off and running.
SAIGON South Vietnam March 10 CAP)—The United States military command today abandoned a new policy of barring television cameras from daily briefings on the war.
SAIGON South Vietnam, Saturday, March 11 (AP)—A South Vietnamese armored force of about 5,000 troops and 100 vehicles swept into eastern Cambodia yesterday in an attempt to prevent enemy attacks on the approaches to Saigon. It was the first major drive into eastern Cambodia since Nov. 22.
WASHINGTON March 10—The White House announced today that the United States and China had designated their Ambassadors in Paris to serve as the diplomatic channel agreed upon by Presided Nixon and Premier Chou En‐lai for continuing contacts hetween the two countries.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 11—The defeat of South Vietnamese troops during the Laos “incursion” a year ago was a disappointment to American military planners, but it has been widely described in Washington as only a setback along the inevitable road to successful Vietnamization.
DANANG, South Vietnam—On Nguyen Nuoi's left arm there is a tattoo of a nude woman and a line that reads, “Life was beautiful before the mine exploded.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, March 12 (Reuters)—The police seized 11 of Saigon's Vietnamese ‐language newspapers yesterday, the official press agency Vietnam Press reported today.
Lynn Weiss was inspired by John F. Kennedy and disturbed by the Vietnam war. As an undergraduate, she prepared for medical school, but as the war dragged on in 1966, she changed her ambition to one of outlawing war, “which she considered a disease itself,” her mother recalls.
TAY NINH, South Vietnam, Sunday, March 12 (AP)—UnitedStates 8‐52's bombers supporting a South Vietnamese thrust into eastern Cambodia wrecked an enemy base, military authorities said yesterday. The Saigon command annouced today that its troops had launched a second drive in the region.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 12 (AP)—United States military sources said today that American planes destroyed several North Vietnamese tanks in raids in southern Laos during the last week.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 12 (UPI) — Government military sources said today that North Vietnamese forces have resumed an offensive against Long Tieng and Sam Thong, two key Government bases in north‐central Laos.
SAIGON, March 12 (Reuters) South Vietnamese troops operating in eastern Cambodia and in South Vietnam border areas to smash a suspected enemy build‐up have made no major contact in the first three days, military sources said today.
MILAN, Italy, March 13 —The acting leader of the Italian Communist party opened its national congress here with a cautious appeal to Moscow and Peking to re‐establish “normal” relations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 13 (AP)—Enemy troops reportedly increased their attacks across South Vietnam today, staging most of them in the Central Highlands provinces of Kontum and Pleiku.
TOKYO, March 13 (UPI)—The Justice Ministry today approved the visit of a 14‐member North Vietnamese economic mission to Japan March 20 for a 40‐day stay, the JapanVietnam Trade Association announced.
SAIGON, March 13 (UPI)—The United States command said today that 5,100 American servicemen were sent home last week, the largest number in six weeks. A total of 114,500 troops remain.
KUCHING, Malaysia, March 6—The state government of Sarawak has launched a Vietnam‐style civic‐action program to contest a tenacious Chinese guerrilla movement for the allegiance of isolated tribal villagers and restless Chinese youth in the towns.
The successor [to President Eisenhower] was John Kennedy. Chosen to get things done, but elected only by the skin of his teeth; placed at the head of a vast and wealthy country, but one with grave internal problems; by nature inclined to act swiftly and boldly, but hampered by the cumbersome machinery of Federal administration; entering upon the scene in a world in which American power and glory had spread far and wide, but whose every wound was suppurating and in which a hostile monolithic bloc stood opposed to America; enjoying the advantages of youth, but suffering the drawbacks of a novice—hi spite of so many obstacles, the new President was determined to devote him, self to the cause of freedom, justice and progress.
WASHINGTON, March 14—President Nixon told Congress today that any substantial cut in the $2.15‐billion he had requested for foreign military aid for the fiscal year beginning July 1 would jeopardize his plan for stable, peaceful relations with China and the Soviet Union.
WASHINGTON, March 14 (AP) — President Nixon announced today that he planned to nominate a career diplomat, Charles W. Whitehouse, to be Deputy Ambassador to Ellsworth Bunker in South Vietnam.
MILAN, Italy, March 14—A special convention desk in the lobby of the Milan Hilton is fielding inquiries these days from Soviet functionaries, Vietnamese women in flowing dresses, Hungarian and Czechoslovak party functionaries and secretive types from Arab countries, Africa and Latin America—all attending the 13th Congress of the Italian Communist party.
TOKYO, March 14 (Reuters) —The Japanese Justice Ministry has approved the entry of a 14‐member North Vietnamese economic mission Into Japan next Monday for a 40‐day stay. ministry sources report. The mission will come here at the invitation of the JapanVietnam Trade Association, a group that seeks to promote contacts with Hanoi. Last month two Japanese Foreign Ministry officials visited Hanoi for the first time at the invitation of the North Vietnamese Chamber of Commerce.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 14 (AP)—United States military sources reported today that B‐52 aircraft destroyed a major North Vietnamese jungle headquarters in eastern Cambodia last night as they flew raids to open the way for a South Vietnamese armored drive.
HONGAY, North Vietnam, March 13 —The villagers in this important coal‐producing city, scene of heavy American bombing attacks five years ago, have a popular saying borrowed in part from a former Air Force Chief of Staff: “Curtis LeMay says he will bomb North Vietnam into the Stone Age; instead he has bombed us into the age of aluminum.”
WASHINGTON, March 15—Antiwar groups announced today plans for a demonstration at the White House March 26 as the start of their spring protests against President Nixon's policy on the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, March 15—Secretary of Defense Melvin It Laird told Congress today that it would have to assume responsibility for “a gap in free world security” if it failed to approve the full $2:15‐billion in foreign military aid that the Administration had requested for the year beginning July 1.
PARIS, March 15 (AP)—The Communist delegations to the Vietnam peace talks agreed today to a proposal by the United States and South Vietnamese negotiators that they meet tomorrow. It will be the first session of the peace talks in three weeks.
VIETNIANE, Laos, March 15 (AP)—Control of a ridge overlooking the key base of Long Tieng reportedly passed to the North Vietnamese yesterday and back to the Laotians today as enemy pressure slackened somewhat.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 15 (UPI)—The United States command today ordered its second largest pullout of troops from the war zone, with the deactivation of 42 Air Force and Army units that total 5,700 men. Last July 42 units totaling 6,100 men were withdrawn.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March‐16 (AP)—Vietcong gunners shelled the provincial capital of Quangngai and a United States base camp on the outskirts of Danang yesterday and today. In the air war, American fighter‐bombers resumed attacks over North Vietnam after a three‐day absence.
WASHINGTON, March 15 (AP) — Secretary of State William P. Rogers has decided to continue passport restrictions on travel to North Korea, North Vietnam and Cuba until March 15, 1973, a State Department spokesman said today.
SEOUL, South Korea, March 15—South Korea is taking a skeptical attitude toward the recent overtures by North Korea for a peace agreement and political discussions between the two parts of this divided country.
WASHINGTON, March 16—Sir Robert Thompson, the British counter‐insurgency expert, reportedly assured the White House last week that the South Vietnamese forces will be capable of handling their country's internal security after United States troops are reduced to the 69,000‐man level by May 1.
PARIS, March 16—The United States proposed to North Vietnem and the Vietcong today that prisoner‐of‐war camps be opened to international inspection “in return for an undertaking by both sides to refrain from efforts to liberate prisoners from the locations visited.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 16 (AP) — Two Americans were reported killed in action in Indochina last week and 19 wounded. The casualty total of 21 was the lowest since mid‐December.
DENVER, March 16—The National Federation of Priests Councils strongly backed the Harrisburg Seven defendants today and denied membership in the Roman Catholic organization to a married priests’ group.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 16 (AP)—A large increase in enemy attacks in South Vietnam was reported today by the Saigon command.
Four years ago Eugene McCarthy burst upon the national political scene as an attractive, unorthodox spokesman of the developing revulsion against the Vietnam war. When he declared again this year, this newspaper welcomed his candidacy because he seemed likely to clarify issues and improve the Democratic dialogue.
To the Editor: Little attention has been paid to the Incompatibility of the “Vietnamization” policy with a serious offer of meaningful elections or U.S. withdrawal.

SAIGON, South Vietnam. March 17 (Reuters) —Nearly half of Saigon's Vietnameselanguage newspapers have ceased publication after a Government ‐ordered increase of 125 per cent in the price of newsprint, official sources said today.
LOM SAX, Thailand, March 16—Two Thai Army battalions, using United States equipment and tactics developed by the American Army in Vietnam, are trying to dislodge Communist insurgents from mile‐high plateau 16 miles northwest of here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 17 (AP) — A United States helicopter carrying an American combat team into action crashed today in a river 20 miles northeast of here, apparently killing all 11 aboard.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—When the American soldiers saw the ceramic elephants of South Vietnam, it was love at first sight.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 17 — Three American labor leaders were greeted with bouquets today on their arrival to begin a one‐week vi sit whose aim is. in the words of one, “to do what we can to see an end to this immoral and senseless war.”
The two‐month‐old National Union of Theological Students and Seminarians yesterday designated March 29 as a day of “public demonstration” in support of the Harrisburg Seven defendants.
WASHINGTON, March 17—High Administration officials said today that after President Nixon's return from China, the White House directed the Air Force to plan the gradual withdrawal of a substantial part of its forces on Taiwan over the next year or two.
WASHINGTON, March 18—As part of its. Vietnamization efforts the Defense Department is using computers that can rapidly translate complex English technical and instructional manuals into Vietnamese:
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. March 18 (UPI)—A young Vietnam veteran who resorted to heroin to kill the pain in his mine‐shattered leg has been sentenced to three years in prison for a holdup staged to support his $80‐a‐day drug habit. Officials said Thursday that Tom Murray 23 years old of New York City, had agreed to undergo an operation at Raiford ‘Prison to have the leg, which has become cancerous, removed.
EACH day for the past year, when the clouds aren't too thick overhead, the North Vietnamese soldiers, drivers and engineers who travel the Ho Chi Minh trail down southern Laos can expect to witness the same thing. With the trucks pulled over and covered with branches, and the gasoline stored in camouflaged revetments, three specks come wheeling out of the eastern sky and start in over the trail. The two outside planes take the banking turn more steeply to cut their speed and fall behind the center plane, which plunges into a dive over the jungle. If anyone on the ground were still watching, he would see the two olive‐drab bombs drop from the plane like eggs, wobble for a moment in the air and then plunge toward the ground. The jet pulls out of the dive at over 3,000 feet—too high for anyone to spot the NAVY markings on its hull. The men on the ground feel the shock of the bombs before they hear the explosion. Perhaps the bombs hit a truck, or a bunker. More likely, the bombs have put two more craters in the jungle, next to ones blown the day before or the year before; conical holes filling with green water or already blurred under a mat of creepers and brush.
GENEVA, March 18 — The World Council of Churches is trying to promote a meeting in Europe between Buddhists, Roman Catholics and Protestants from North Vietnam and South Vietnam to discuss long‐term prospects, it was disclosed this week.
DANANG, South Vietnam, March 19—“The bad guys have gone 20th century,” the young Air Force pilot said He was still shaken by a barrage aimed at his small observation plane by antiaircraft gunners on the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos.
PEKING, March 19—Premier Chou En‐lai charged tonight at a banquet for the former Cambodian Head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, that “certain powers” were creating a “third force” to seek a cornpromise solution in Cambodia, in an attempt to split the ranks, of the Prince's government in exile.
RACHGOI, South Vietnam, March 9—When Duong Van Nho enters a village he heads straight for the central marketplace.
WASHINGTON, March 19 —Seymour M. Hersh, an American freelance journalist who returned today from two weeks in Hanoi, said tonight that he had brought back with him 259 letters from American prisoners of war.
To the Editor: I question the analogy between the suggestion for a cease‐fire in Vietnam and the conciliatory British proposal—of the Carlisle Peace Commission in the American Revolution. Prof. North Callahan [letter March 5] is correct in his observation that in fact the Continental Congress did turn down what amounted to a cease‐fire proposal, but I take issue with his explanation.
FIREBASE PHU XUAN, South Vietnam, March 20 — South Vietnamese forces, after a week of sharp battles in the mountains west of Hue, appear to have won the first part of an annual struggle to prevent the Communist forces from attacking the populated lowland cities from their jungle base areas.
ROXBURY, Conn. — A new chapter m the history of the Indian Ocean opened long before the winding down of the Vietnam conflict, and the Indian‐Pakistan war.
Sgt. John David Herndon, who in 1968 was sent home wounded after 15 months in Vietnam, returned to the United States again yesterday to be test case in a campaign for amnesty for deserters.
PNOMPENH, Tuesday, March 21 (UPI)—The military situation in this southeastern province of Preyveng was described as “serious” by the Cambodian command after enemy gunners hit two towns yesterday. A South Vietnamese ammunition dump was destroyed, six persons were killed and at least 24 were wounded.
To the Editor: The United States has now been engaged in the Vietnam war for decade, and for six years the American people have been Involved in a shooting war.. Although President Nixon keeps stating that he is winding down the war, the fighting, the killings and the bombings still go on and as yet there is no end in sight.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 20 (AP)—The United States command reported today that the 100th “protective reaction” air strike of the year was flown last night over North Vietnam.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 21 (AP)—An attack by enemy demolition men was reported against the big Tayninh West base camp, 60 miles northwest of Saigon, the headquarters of a South Vietnamese drive against enemy base camps in eastern Cambodia.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, March 23 (AP)—Enemy troops poured nearly 30 rockets. into and around the main operational base for the current South Vietnamese drive into Cambodia, killing seven persons, wounding seven and destroying more than 100,000 gallons of fuel, the Saigon ommand reported today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 22—President Nguyen Van Thieu dismissed five top aides of the Minister of Defense today and consulted with him about the possibility of the minister's own resignation or dismissal for political reasons in a scandal about a military retirement fund.
There's a good deal of, sentiment and dreamy invention attached to the American prisoners of war in North Vietnam. Politicians and newsmen often talk as though these pilots had been kidnapped from a farm in Iowa or out of a canoe paddling the waterways of Minnesota.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 22—Mrs. Ngo Ba Thanh, a leading critic of the Saigon Govemment and the war, who has been in prison and has been suffering asthmatic attacks for six months, was carried to military court in downtoWn Saigon on a stretcher today to face charges of having engaged in activities harmful to ,national security.
MILWAUKEE, March 23 — Senator George McGovern said today that George C. Wallace's strong victory in the Florida primary last week represented “an angry cry from the guts of ordinary Americans against a system which doesn't give a damn about what's really bothering people in this coun try today.
In a sharp reversal from last year, most American women now favor “the thrust for equality,” according to the results of a women's opinion poll made public here yesterday.
WASHINGTON, March 23— The State Department said to day that the United States would be making a “continuous assessment” each week to de termine whether or not the Communist delegations in Paris were prepared to negotiate seriously.
PARIS, March 23—The United States declared an in definite suspension of the Paris peace conference on Viet nam today.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 16 — North Vietnamese officials appear to view the dis cussion in the United States over the treatment of Ameri can prisoners as something foisted on the public by the White House in an attempt to divert attention from the issue everyone here constantly talks about—settling the war through negotiation.
WASHINGTON, March 23— The Senate, in a case growing out of Senator Mike Gravel's publication of the secret Pen tagon study of the Vietnam war, decided today to challenge the executive branch before the Supreme Court on the scope of Congressional immunity un der the Constitution.
WASHINGTON, March 23 — Assistant Secretary of State Marshall Green said today that his recent tour of 13 Asian and Pacific countries had con vinced him that countries in the area were more concerned about a Congressional mood opposing foreign aid than about President Nixon's trip to China.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 23 (AP)—The South Viet namese command reported an increase today in enemy at tacks on its troops in South Vietnam and in part of neigh boring Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 23—Intelligence reports are said to show that the North Vietnamese have recent ly built up airfields in the southern part of their country and have been promising the Vietcong and their own troops that they will begin using bombers over South Vietnam soon.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Fri day, March 24 (AP)—Ter rorists blew the center span out of Pnompenh's main bridge today, killing at least three persons and wounding five.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 24 (AP) — The Saigon command reported today that South Vietnamese rangers and armored vehicles in eastern Cambodia had begun moving toward the beleaguered town of Preyveng, 30 miles east of Pnompenh. The Preyveng garrison has been under siege for five days.
THANHHOA, North Vietnam, March 14 — The bridge at Hamrong, for many years a prime target of the air war, is riddled with shrapnel holes and blackened from blasts — but it apparently is still in daily use and is said to have been since the bombing began. For many North Vietnamese the failure of American planes to destroy it is symbolic of what they view as the failure of the air war in general.
WASHINGTON, March 24—The Navy and Air Force said today that they had temporarily suspended flight operations of 144 A‐7 close support bombers because of potential engine problems. The A‐7 aircraft on combat missions in Vietnam were excepted from the order, the Pentagon announcement said.
PARIS, March 24 (AP)—Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, the Vietcong foreign minister, accused the United States today of “sabotaging” the Vietnam peace talks and declared that her people “will continue their just struggle” if the United States refuses to negotiate.
WASHINGTON, March 24 —President Nixon said today that agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union on a limitation on strategic arms would probably have to await his trip to Moscow in May for talks with Soviet leaders.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 24 (AP) — Informed sources reported today that Laotian regular army unite abandoned six positions 10 and 25 miles north and cast of Luang Prabang, the royal capital, in the face of North Vietnamese mortar barrages and ground assaults.
The United States walkout from the Paris peace talks is primarily a symbolic token of the Nixon Administration's turn from negotiations to Vietnamization as a means of ending the Indochina war.
WASHINGTON, March 24—Following is the transcript of President Nixon's news conference today as released by the White House:
WASHINGTON — The exasperation and sense of being “used” had been building for months. At the State De partment, the Pentagon and the White House, a consensus had developed that the sterile and stalemated Paris peace talks were serving the enemy's pur poses far more than those of the Unit ed States or South Vietnam.
SAIGON— The Americans and their South Vietnamese, Laotian and Cam bodian allies are fighting three dif ferent ground wars these days. The North Vietnamese are fighting one, in three different places. And last week American analysts here, trying to make sense of it all, were saying that the Communists might be concentrat ing their attacks in Laos and Cam bodia because it is easier for them to succeed there now than it is in South Vietnam.
VIENTIANE, March 25 (Reu ters)—North Vietnamese troops tightened pressure on the Gov ernment defense line around Luang Prabang, the seat of Laotian royalty, United States sources said here.
National opinion surveys show that Americans worry more about drugs than anything except the economy and Vietnam—and since the spring of 1970 the drug panic has risen sharply. Can the politicians be far behind?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 25 (AP)—South Vietnam ese troops reportedly pushed deeper into eastern Cambodia today, uncovering more enemy supply dumps along the way.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 25 (Reuters) — President Nguyen Van Thieu today grant ed amnesty to 162 convicted criminals to mark the first anni versary tomorrow of South Vietnam's five‐year rural eco nomic development plan.
No single event of the Vietnam war has come more to symbolize the cat astrophic consequences of the Ameri Jean involvement than the My Lai massacre. Despite claims by mili tary and political leaders that it was only an isolated aberration by a handful of misfit troops, millions around ‘the world have come to see it as only the largest and most pub licized of countless atrocities that have marked the war.
VIENTIANE, Laos. March 25 —North Vietnamese forces, in heavy shelling beginning last Saturday and followed by a se ries of ground attacks have driven Laotian troops off four of the nine positions on the ridge overlooking the mountain base at Long Tieng.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 26 (UPI)—The South Vietnamese reported killing 106 ?? troops today in three clashes near the old imperial city of Hue.
SWORDS AND PLOWSHARES. By Gen. Max well D. Taylo 134 pages. Illustrated. Norton. $10.
To the Editor:
HAIPHONG, North Vietnam, March 12—North Vietnam plans to expand its harbor facilities here at least 50 per cent in the next year.
HONG KONG, Monday, March 27—A top‐level Soviet military delegation of special lets in air defense has arrived in Hanoi.
HARRISBURG, March 26 — Some 600 supporters of the Harrisburg Seven, many with faces painted in the macabre hues of death, began today a week of antiwar protests.
LONGTHANH, South Viet nam, March 10—Nguyen Van Tien has a new tractor. Mrs. Mai Thi Hue, down at the rice mill, and her neighbors across the canal have new television gets.
PNOMPENH, March 26 (Agence France‐Presse) — Traf fic on the Mekong River be tween South Vietnam and Cambodia has been halted, a military Spokesman said here today. Pnompenh is heavily de pendent, on river traffic, espe cially for fuel and munitions.
Three American labor lead ers returned last night from a visit to North Vietnam and said that they had what they felt was something “worth while” to report to Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, and possibly to the President.
TOKYO, March 27 (AP)— Marshal Pavel F. Batitsky, So viet deputy defense minister, met with the North Vietnamese defense minister, Vo Nguyen Giap, in Hanoi today and pledged continued military sup port for the Vietnam war, the official Vietnam News Agency reported.
A rally for prisoners of war in Vietnam attracted a crowd of up to 1,500 yesterday after noon in the financial district of lower Manhattan.
SAIGON, South Vietnan, March 27 (AP) —The United States command announced to day that American troop strength in Vietnam dropped to 101,700 in the week ended last Thursday.
HARRISBURG, Pa., March 27 (AP)—A group calling itself the Citizens Committee to demili tarize Industry said today that it had sabotaged “several hun dred casings for 500‐pound bombs” intended for use in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, March 27— A conference of Protestant, Roman Catholic and Jewish leaders called today for almost total amnesty for deserters from the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, Tuesday, March 28 —North Vietnamese troops shot down three helicopters with heavy ground fire yesterday, killing one American and wounding five others, the United States command re ported.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 27 (UPI) — Military sources said that thousands of South Vietnamese troops with drew from eastern Cambodia today to regroup for a new as sault on a big Vietcong supply base.
HARRISBURG, Pa., March 28 (AP)—Alger Hiss, who served a Federal prison term in con nection with pro‐Communist activities a generation ago, sug gested tonight that “maybe we were premature Ralph Naders.”“Many of the peace move ment aspirations are familiar to me from our day,” the 67‐ year‐old former high State De partment aide told an estimated total of 500 listeners at an anti war seminar in support of the Harrisburg Seven.
WASHINGTON—If a man from Mars were to visit Capitol Hill and take the term House of Representatives literally, he would conclude that the United States is a prosperous land of small towns, farms and suburbs occupied by middle‐aged and elderly white men who are lawyers, bankers, businessmen, farmers and occasionally teachers or journalists. Many are quite rich. No one under thirty lives there. No veterans of the Vietnam war. It has an insignifi cant number of women and black members.
MILWAUKEE, March 28 — Senator George McGovern ac cused President Nixon today of “shabby” treatment of the fam ilies of prisoners of war by fail ing to answer letters from them if they contain criticism of his Vietnam policies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 28 (AP) — American B‐52's flew seven missions over the northern and central parts of South Vietnam today in what the United States command described as a continuing cam paign to break up any attempt ed enemy offensive. A mission is flown by one to three planes.
Mrs. Robert S. McNamara, the guiding force behind Reading Is Fundamental, a national program to put free books in the hands of chil dren who seldom before had a chance to own a book of their selection, triumphantly announced a foundation grant of $1.15‐million.
PHANRANG, South Vietnam, March 28 (AP)—The United States Air Force deactivated its 315th Tactical Airlift Wing today and turned over to South Vietnam its Phanrang air base, built on the central coast six years ago at a cost of $60‐ million.
HONG KONG, Wednesday, March 29 (Reuters) — North Vietnam has called on the United States to return to the Paris peace conference on Vietnam, suspended in definitely by President Nixon, according to the official North Vietnamese press agency.
HANOI, North Vietnam, March 17—In a series of interviews, North Vietnamese officials have taken pains to say they want to reassure the United States that North Vietnam has no in tention of pressing a political or ideological claim on the South if President Nguyen Van Thieu is ousted.
HARRISBURG, Pa., March 29—About 175 young men and women, most of them semi narians, surrounded the Fed eral Building with a chain today to protest the Vietnam war and expressed support for the Harrisburg Seven defend ants on trial within.
SAIGON, March 29 (UPI)— Military sources said today that new “unconfirmed intelligence” reports indicated that North Vietnam was planning to use Soviet‐built jets for the first time in the fighting in South Vietnam. The sources added, however, that United States officers were highly skeptical of the reports, which originated with South Vietnamese offi cials.
HONG KONG, Thursday, March 30 (Reuters)—China ac cused the United States today of arbitrarily suspending the Paris peace talks and urged the Nixon Administration to re sume talks with the Vietnamese Communists in a serious man ner.
PARIS, March 29 — North Vietnam said today that it was waiting for the United States to take the initiative in resum ing the stalled peace talks here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 30 — North Vietnamese antiaircraft missiles shot down an Air Force AC‐130 gunship over the Ho CM Minh Trail in southern Laos early yesterday morning, and the 14 crewmen of the four‐engine plane were declared missing to day by the United States com mand.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March29 (AP)—Two Ameri can soldiers were killed and four wounded in a booby‐trap explosion today as they pa trolled a Jungle area 31 miles east of Saigon.
SAIGON,South Vietnam, March 30 —They sell cars to G.I.'s in the PX and hunt for Vietcong in the jungle. They live in air‐conditioned bungalows called Palm Springs and marry willowy Viet namese. They are the handful of Ameri cans, out of two million soldiers and 50,000 civilians, who have stayed on, year after year, as people back home have become discouraged and disillu sioned with the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, March 31—North Viet namese gunners poured up to 4,000 rounds of their heaviest artillery, rockets and mortars into South Vietnamese bases and towns along the demilitar ized zone yesterday in the big gest attack since the sieges of Conthien and Khesanh more than four years ago.
PARIS, March 30 (AP)—Wil liam J. Porter, head of the United States delegation to the Vietnam peace talks here, left for Washington today for con sultations.
The Association of the Bar of the City of New York is considering the feasibility of conductinz an inquiry into what it has described as com pelling evidence that serious breaches of the law of war have been committed by all parties in the Indochina war.
WASHINGTON, March 30 — The Nixon Administration is re ported to be seriously concerned over the increased casualty rate in the air war in Indochina.
WORCESTER, Mass.—Almost a cen tury ago, Frederick Jackson Turner wrote that the westward expansion of America was “destined to go on until a physical barrier must finally obstruct its progress.” Only now, when our young brothers and sons return from Asia without their limbs, with their spines twisted and broken, do we feel the full weight of the closing of the frontier.
SAIGON,South Vietnam, March 30—Communist gunners and ground troops staged a se ries of heavy, apparently co ordinated attacks on eight South Vietnamese fire support bases along the demilitarized zone today, and the fighting re portedly continued into the night.
MILWAUKEE, March 30— Several Democratic contenders in Wisconsin's crowded Presi dential primary Tuesday, their strength within the party frag mented by their sheer numbers, stepped up today their efforts to stimulate and then capture a big Republican crossover vote.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31—The syndicated columnist Jack Anderson reported today that Henry A. Kissinger, Presidential, assistant for national security affairs, told senior Administra tion officials during the India Pakistani crisis that. President Nixon “does not want to be even‐handed.”
SAIGON, Dec. 31 (UPI)—The Hanoi radio said today that North Vietnam has captured three American pilots and it gave their names. They were the names of three men who had flown two of three planes the United States command in Saigon admits having lost yes terday and Sunday.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 31 (Reuters)—Military sources said today that North Vietnam ese troops had burned the strategic Boloven highlands town of Paksong to the ground.
TOKYO, Saturday, Jan. 1 (AP)—North Vietnam said to day that it had shot down 24 United States warplanes and had captured seven American pilots in the five days ended Thursday.
CLEVELAND, Dec. 31 (AP) —A group protesting recent United States bombirg of North Vietnam smeared what its members said was blood on desks, walls, floors and the Navy flag at the Navy recruit ing office here today. The police arrested the man they said was leader of the group, Charles W. Rawlings, 40 years old, of Shaker Heights, a for mer minister, and dispersed the rest of the group.
Jeremy Biggs, who runs the money at the $58‐million New York Venture Fund, might be more politically oriented, than the average money manager. At any rate, he's willing to put his fund's money where his mouth is. Mr. Biggs, blondish, young ish and thoughaful, has scanned recent Nixon moves for clues to the next market beneficiary. Politically, he believes, President Nixon has done something for the econ omy—both America's and the world's. He notes that Mr. Nixon has approached China, and that he's unwind ing the war in Vietnam.
Phase One of President Nixon's renewal of the air war against North Vietnam has ended after five days of the heaviest bombing since President Johnson suspended the attack in 1968 to get peace negotiations started. The renewed bombing halt is a welcome start for 1972. But a bigger and even more perilous Phase Two cannot b'e far behind unless Mr. Nixon abandons his vain pursuit of military victory in Indochina and acts to revive the neglected Paris peace talks.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 —United States Governmentan alysts said today that China's relatively restrained reaction to the five‐day American bombing of North Vietnam indicated a wish to go ahead with President Nixon's trip in February even at the cost of additional strains in Peking's. relations with Hanoi.
The editor of an Episcopal weekly charged yesterday that the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine should no longer enjoy the right to tax exemption because it was re cently used for “partisan po litical gatherings.”
WASHINGTON — There has been no official announcement, but knowledgeable lawyers and draft counselors are convinced that draft calls this year will be quite small — only a fraction of the calls during the peak of the Vietnam buildup and less than half the size of last year's total call.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, tan. 1—Gai had hoped that in 1971 a small, desperate student movement could change South Vietnam. It changed nothing, so Gai a 23‐year‐old University of Saigon graduate, stopped believing that she could do anything about a country that, she felt, urgently needed so much.
SYDNEY, Australia, Jan. 1—With the Australian combat role in South Vietnam now at an end, this Southwest Pacific country is reassessing her controversial involvement in Asia. The intimate association of Australia with United States foreign policy, not only in Vietnam but in China and elsewhere, is one aspect of the commitment being questioned.
To the Editor: The college campuses across the country were silent ‘this week as the seasonal wish of “peace on earth” was desecrated by our air force in Vietnam. Students were scattered far from their, schools for the Christmas vacation when they heard of the escalated attacks against ‘North Vietnam. There was no chance of an outbreak which would threaten Washington's commuter traffic. Yet the injury inflicted‐on the student world by the 1971 Christmas bombing was greater, I am afraid, than any which need be feared from their demonstrations.
It has been a historic year for the United States and for President Nixon. In economic policy and relations. with China, Mr. Nixon has shown himself able to break away from his own past positions and let the facts prevail.
These pictures depict a mission typical of the kind U.S. planes carried out on North Vietnam and the Ho Chi Minh Trail supply complex last week. Clockwise from above: An Ainerican crew is briefed aboard a carrier in the Tonkin Gulf; 500‐pound bombs are loaded aboard an A‐6 fighterbomber; the plane is signaled for takeoff from the carrier deck; the target area is left scorched and pocked by craters. The objective of the trail bombing is to interdict Communist troops and supplies.
A daughter was born to Capt. Marc A. Abramowitz, Chaplain Corps, U.S.A., and Mrs. Abramowitz of Far Rockaway, Queens, in St. Joseph's Hospital, Far Rockaway. The. child, whose father is stationed in Vietnam, is named Dena Beth.
WASHINGTON—The Nixon Administration's decision to reactivate the air campaign against North Vietnam could well be the most serious escalation since the Gulf of Tonkin in May, 1964.
Following Orders “What would most people do if ordered to shoot all the inhabitants of a Vietnamese village suspected of aiding the enemy, including old men, women and, children?”
WASHINGTON—Why was so much of the country surprised last week when President Nixon ordered the bombing of North Vietnam? The President had said a year ago that he would do it.
PARIS—The new United States Asian policy focuses directly upon relations with China and clearly expects that as a consequence of this emphasis settlement of the Vietnam war can ultimately be arranged. The search for accommodation with Peking began three years ago and will be dramatized next month by President.Nixon's visit. TWo significant developments can be related to this policy. The. first was expression of unqualified, American support for Pakistan against India during their recent war.’ The second is resumption of bombing ‘in North Vietnam and U.S. postponement of scheduled sessions of the Paris peace negotiations'.
The question of amnesty for the many young men who have avoided military service or deserted in recent years is properly part of the moral aftermath of the Vietnam war. The first difficulty in this tangled ethical problem is that the war his not ended. Although draft calls are temporarily suspended and casualties greatly reduced, each week a few American soldiers are still killed in Vietnam, scores are. wounded and thousands run the risk of military combat if the enemy should choose to go on the offensive.
‘SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 2 (AP)—American planes made more than 200 strikes against North Vietnamese supply lines in Cambodia and Laos yesterday.
To the Editor: I consider myself one of the silent minority who thinks. Amid all the hysterical debate by the politically ambitious of our country, one must evaluate what the leadership is doing, and “on balance” for the long run of our American society, is it good? Did Senator Kennedy want the President to send a crusade into India or Pakistan, escalating our involvement the way his family escalated our Vietnam debacle? The Times in its editorials also thought the Administration did not do enough in the right direction to avoid the subsequent war.
Ruth Friedman's first daughter was not delivered in a hospital. The 2½‐year‐old. Vietnamese girl was delivered Into her mother's arms at Kennedy International Airport on Dec. 11.
SAIGON, San. 2 (AP)—Records of the United States command show that the United States cloasd out 1971 with the heaviest losses of tactical aircraft since the period before the bombing of North Vietnam Was ordered halted on Nov. 1, 1968.
What Is Needed
WASHINGTON, Jan. 2—President Nixon left little doubt tonight that he intended to run for a second term in office, and said that his present inclination was to keep Vice President Ag‐1 new on the ticket.

SAIGON, Monday, Jan. 3 (Reuters)—Enemy gunners fired rockets into the large United States air base at Dating early today, apparently in retaliation for last week's bombing of North, Vietnam, military sources here said.
“I can assure you tonight with confidence that American involvement in this war is coming to an end.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 2—President Nixon said tonight in his teleVised intervie that he would not grant amnesty to Americans who have refused to serve in Vietnam, but he held out the possibility that there would be a “liberal” amnesty policy when there were no American troops in Southeast Asia.
HILLSDALE, N. Y., Jan. 2 (AP)—The daughter of Vu Van Thai, the former South Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States who was named as a co‐conspirator in the Pentagon papers case, said today that her father told her he had never seen the documents.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 2 —President Nixon said tonight that the United States would continue to wind up its involvement in Vietnam in coming months, but said that 25,000 to 35,000 American troops would remain until the North Vietnamese released all the American prisoners of war.
Following are excerpts from an interview with President Nixon by Dan Rather of the Columbia Broadcasting System last night, as recorded by The New York Times:
There are a few set procedures for those American families wanting to adopt Vietnamese children. Unlike Korean adoptions, where there are at least some clear avenues of approach, Vietnamese adoptions are hit miss, guess‐as‐you‐go procedures where patience, unyielding determination and cultivation of the right people are the decisive factors.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3—President Nixon has now offered the outline of his plans for a fourth year of withdrawals from Vietnam, still leaving the end in doubt because he is still buying time to strengthen Saigon's forces and to improve the antiCommunist positions in Laos and Cambodia.
SAIGON—Every morning, thousands of North Vietnamese, who came south before and after the partition of Vietnam in 1954, gather in sidewalk soup stalls of crowded, unpretentious shops in Saigon for a morning ritual—a bowl of pho, a beef and noodle soup they have preserved from their old lives back home.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 3 (AP) — North Vietnamese troops jumped a 25MAR United States infantry patrol in jungles 40 miles northeast of Saigon yesterday and shot down three medical evacuation helicopters marked with red crosses trying to lift out the wounded. An observation helicopter also was shot down.
Having described "Dynamite Chicken," which landed at the Kips Bay yesterday, as a "multi-media movie magazine inspired by the TV generation," Ernie Pintoff, its producer-director, has almost said it all.In this case, the medium is mostly the message. But the medium blithely overlooks stressing the points of a good number of its messages in favor of a succession of kaleidoscopic glimpses of youth's apathy or revolt against the Establishment. Like its pertinent four letter words and nudes, "Dynamite Chicken" may be fun and games on occasion but it's hardly a shocking revelation these days.Since it was aimed at the college circuits, where it has been shown for some time, "Dynamite Chicken" briefly employs the talents of practically everyone adored by the campus crowd, from Joan Baez to Andy Warhol, in skits, songs and on its sound track. And Mr. Pintoff, who's kidded our foibles in cartoons (the Oscar-winning "The Critic") on TV and on film, has been aided by a legion of filmmakers and entertainers in fashioning this "contemporary probe of the mores and manners of the revolutionary era and a lot of other things."But "Dynamite Chicken" often appears to be a lot of other things. The Ace Trucking Company, for example, projects authentic comedy in their version of filming a TV commercial. A nude unsuccessfully reading for the role of "Cinderella" is funny, not obscene, as is an imitation of Lyndon B. Johnson.The varied views of Black Panthers, hard hats versus intellectuals on the American Flag, Women's Lib, Malcolm X and Vietnam are offered straight and/or with tongue in cheek but only with spasmodic impact. There is little doubt that a torrid, strip-teasing "nun" is sophomoric stuff compared with the satiric thrust of Ron Carey's swinging "priest" miming to the beat of Lionel Goldbart's "God Loves Rock and Roll" or Joan Baez's tender rendition of "Carry It On."In short, while no one is chicken here, "Dynamite Chicken" is rarely dynamite.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 3 (Reuters)—The large Americansupported guerrilla base at Long Tieng came under renewed shelling from North Vietnamese forces today, and a Government spokesman here said it was in danger of being overrun.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 3 (Reuters)—United States troop strength in South Vietham has dropped to 157,000, a decrease of 386,400 from the peak of April, 1969, the United States command announced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 3—The Government's landreform program, considered the most vital part of its effort to win the support of landless peasants, is proceeding despite corruption, resistance from many owners and even some hesitation among those wile are supposed to get free land.
President Nixon either signaled a significant shift his Vietnam policy or he misled the American people when he told a TV interviewer night before last that a complete cessation of American military involvement in Indochina “depends on one circumstance”; i.e., the prisoner‐of‐war situation.
DAKAR, Senegal, Jan. 3 —Vu Van Thai, the former South Vietnamese diplomat who was named as a co‐conspirator with Dr. Daniel Ellsberg in connection with the Pentagon papers last week, said today that he and Dr. Ellsberg had been “friends for a long time” and had met “in the context of his activities concerning Vietnam.”
PARIS, Jan. 3 (AP)—North Vietnam asserted today that the only way President Nixon could free United States prisoners of war and “get out of the swamp in Vietnam,” was to abandon hopes of military victory and “negotiate seriously at the Paris conference on Vietnam.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3 (UPI) —The Pentagon, holding open the possibility of renewed bombing of North Vietnam, said today that United States planes had failed to hit all of their planned targets in the five‐day series of air strikes on the North last week.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 4 (UPI)—American military spokesmen said today that the 10‐year‐old practice of arming ambulance helicopters was due to be ended by the middle of this month.
The White House has wasted no time in shattering the illusion created by President Nixon in his television interview earlier this week when he indicated that the fate of American prisoners of war is the “one circumstance” standing in the way of total withdrawal from Indochina.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 4 (UPI) — A Defense Ministry spokesman reported today that enemy troops, supported by two North Vietnamese MIG aircraft, had destroyed a bridge on the only road between Vientiane and the royal capital, Luang Prabang.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 5 (AP)—American helicopters supporting South Vietnamese troops in the Mekong Delta accidentally fired on Government forces, killing one soldier and wounding seven, the United States command disclosed today.
PARIS—The only two capitals with significant diplomatic leverage on Hanoi's policy are Moscow and Peking. For a long time U.S. diplomacy sought to prevail upon Russia to bring its influence to bear in order to produce what Washington would term an acceptable Indochina settlement. Having failed, American hopes now turn to China.

PARIS, Jan. 4 (UPI)—The United States and South Vietnam agreed today to resume the Vietnam peace talks on Thursday after four weeks, of postponements by both sides.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 5 (Reuters)— United States B‐52's bombed what were believed to be North Vietnamese troop concentrations and bunker complexes along the demilitarized zone today following reports of stepped‐up enemy activity in the area.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 5—An American jet escorting B‐52's on a raid over the.Ho Chi Minh supply trail in Laos darted over neighboring North Vietnam today for a “protective reaction” strike on an antiaircraft position, the United States command reported.
SAIGON, Thursday, Jan. 5 (AP)—The South Vietnamese Government, in a major shift of Military strategy, is abandoning majors bases in Cambodia in favor of a powerful air mobile strike force, official sources said today,
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5—Only slightly more than half of the veterans who have served in the armed forces since 1963 believe that “the President and his Administration are doing all they can to help veteimns readjust to civilian life,” according to the findings of a, special Harris Poll released here today.
HONG KONG, Jan. 5 (AP) —North Vietnam said today that the United States must abandon its policy of Vietnamizing. the the war to obtain the release of Americans held prisoner by Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5 —The top aide to Gov. Patrick J. Lucey of Wisconsin is about to join Mayor Lindsay's campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5—United States officials said today that there was a “better than 50‐50 chance” that Communist forces would overrun the strategic Laotian base at Long Tieng in the next few weeks.
CONCORD, N. H—The show, which had been falling all morning had stopped The old low red Cottage on the edge of Ddrham which had been Once a farmhouse looked like calenclart except for the Cars In the driveway and the big poster ir front with “McCloskey” in large red letters.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan:, 7 (AP)—Wave after wave of American B‐52 bombers struck along the eastern borders of South Vietnam today.
PARIS, Jan. 6—The Vietnamese Communists told the United States at the Paris talks today that it could not have its prisoners back until it agreed both to withdraw its forces and to abandon the Saigon regime of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
LONDON — We visited Thanhhoa Province in September of last year. A large part of North Vietnam was under water owing to the overflowing of the Red River during the monsoon; the floods were the worst since 1885.
Mayor Lindsay criticized as “inhuman” yesterday the American use of a land clearing bomb in Vietnam that, he said, was “as powerful as a small atomic bomb.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 6 (AP)—J. Edgar Hoover, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 'said today that conviction of gangsters had increased and much of the credit had to be given to evidence gleaned from electronic surveillance devices.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 6 — The small shops that have had a booming business making commemorative plaques for sale to Americans are falling on hard times.
MANCHESTER, N. H., Jan. 6 —Senator Edmund S. Muskie declared here tonight that it was time for the United States to withdraw completely from South Vietnam regardless o the consequences.
To the Editor: President Nixon's method of winding down the war recalls the story of how the frog got out of the well; which was by climbing up two feet during the day and sliding back three feet during the night. As more and more of our ground troops are brought home, the more vulnerable are those that remain in South Vietnam. Hence the more vigorously, even viciously, must we intensify the attack in order to protect them. This is one official explanation of the recent heavy bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, Jan. 7 (UPI)—The United States command reported today that an American helicopter had accidentally opened fire on South Vietnamese troops in the Central Highlands yesterday, killing one soldier and wounding five.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 7—Pentagon officials stressed today that plans to send United States warships more frequently into the Indian Ocean were announced several years ago but that their implementation had been deferred because of the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan, 7 (Reuters)—The police confiscated six of Saigon's Vietnamese‐language daily newspapers last night and the Information Ministry withdrew the license from a local news agency, the official Vietnamese news agency reported today.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 7—The State Department rebuked India today for having raised her relations with North Vietnam to the ambassadorial level and said the action cast doubt on New Delhi's neutral role on the International Control Commission in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 8 (AP)—Twenty rounds of mortar fire struck United States fire support base only 20 miles northeast of Saigon last night in the heaviest shelling attack against an American force in six months.
WASHINGTON—At the present time, there are more than 500 draft resisters in Federal jails, about 3,900 draft resisters under indictment, and an estimated 70,000 young Americans living abroad to avoid the draft. Many of these men are victims of bad judgment and poor advice. Many have acted out of deep, personal convictions against the course which our country followed in the Vietnam conflict.
NEW DELHI, Jan, 7—India and North Vietnam upgraded their diplomatic missions from consular to ambassadorial level today, signaling a further deterioration in relations between the United States and India.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Jan. 7—The commander of Saigon's forces in the Central Highlands disclosed today that about 1,800 of his troops landed in northeastern Cambodia this morning, In the fourth operation the South Vietnamese Army has conducted just across the border in the last two months.
NEW DELHI, Jan. 8 — Prime Minister Indira Gandhi tonight called the release of Sheik Mujibur Rahman after more than nine months of detention in West Pakistan “a triumph for the people of Bangladesh, India and world opinion.”
WASHINCTON — Last Sunday, in a nation‐wide television interview, President Nixon gave the impression that he was willing to withdraw all troops and end all bombing and other American military activities in Indochina if North Vietnam would only agree to release American prisoners of war. In fact, Mr. Nixon seemed to be saying, this proposal had already been put to the North Vietnamese delegation in Paris, but Hanoi had “totally rejectnd it.”
WASHINGTON — The Anderson Papers on the U. S. Government's handling of the Indo‐Pakistani war suggest that the Nixon Administration has learned very little from the damning disclosures of the Pentagon Papers on the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan, 8 — The United States military's program for screening drug users will no longer require urinalysis for all personnel going on leave or for rest and recreation, the military command reported,
It was logical for President Nixon to announce his decision to seek a second term in the form of a letter to his New Hampshire supporters. The state not only has the nation's first primary but is also the site of several pivotal events in Mr. Nixon's long political career.
Glenn W. Turner is a 37‐year‐old former door‐to‐door salesman, a Florida sharecropper's son who became the says) a multimillionaire by developing a success motivation course called “Dare to Be Great” and a home cosmetic sales.program called Koscot Interplanetary. Last year the Orlandobased Mr. Turner put up the money to finance the defense of Capt. Ernst L. Medina in his court‐martial for responsibility for the Mylai massacre In Vietnam. And today he is scheduled to receive the “American of the Year” award from the Lions International Club.
Long Tieng is a strategically finportant base for an American‐supported native army fighting the Communists in Laos. In recent days the future of Long Tieng has become uncertain. Prolonged shelling from North Vietnamese forces using 130‐mm. guns — the heaviest employed by the enemy in Laos — have destroyed the base's ammunition dump and made it extremely difficult for American aircraft to land there. A few weeks ago, more than 30,000 civilians were evacuated from Long Tieng; last week it was reported that all infantry troops had been moved out of the base Into surrounding hills.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan: 8 (Reuter) — All South Vietnamese under 18 years old were banned today from going to Saigon's snack bars, nightclubs and massage parlors. Observers believe the ban was imposed to curb increasing undisciplined behavier among youths and the effects that the G.I. culture might have on them.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan, 8 — The South Vietnartiese Government announced today that it would bar the new Indian head of the International Control Commission in Vietnam from entering the country in reprisal for India's elevation of diplomatic relations with Hanoi to ambassadorial level without doing the same hi Saigon.
Strong and growing forces are at work in the United States endeavoring to turn the vision of Americans in ward. Repelled by our policy in Vietnam and taking for granted the assumption that no foreign power will present a serious military threat to the nation, these forces focus on the nation's domestic needs, implying that they can best be met if we turn our hacks on the rest of the world.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 9 (AP) — A terrorist hurled a grenade into a Government‐sponsored youth rally in coastal city of Quinhon last night, killing nine teachers and students and wounding 110 other persons. The terrorist escaped.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8 — Senator George McGovern said today that a conversation he had this week with a North Vietnamese representative at the Paris peace talks had convinced him that American prisoners of war would be released if the United States set a definite date for ending all military operations fit Indochina,
TAMPA, Fla., Jan. 8 — Mayor Lindsay charged today that some of his Democratic opponents were hypocritical in opposing the Vietnam war now after voting “year after year” to support the war In Congress.
ABOARD U.S.S. CORAL SEA, in the South China Sea, Jan. 7, — The Indochina war and its complexities seem far away from this thousand‐foot ‐long floating air base. What matters to the hundred or so pilots aboard is not the policies of Washington and Hanoi but years of training for and masculine pride in a dangerous and exacting profession.
A black ex‐marine's account of his Southern upbringing, his Vietnam experiences and his desertion after being wounded and sent back to Japan. A hard, clear portrayal of how racism and a bad war led one man to change from a dedicated marine to a political exile in Sweden.
To the Editor:
AFTER briefly taking a back seat to antiwar demonstrators at more than a half‐dozen of America's most hallowed national shrines in recent weeks, tourists have returned in greater force than ever, according to the National Park Service. No fewer than seven national shrines in New York, Philadelphia and Washington were either seized or picketed by antiwar demonstrators in the waning days of 1971, and all emerged unscathed and with their prestige enhanced. In addition to the Statue of Liberty, the shrines included Independence Hall and the Betsy Ross House in Philadelphia, the Jefferson and Lincoln Memorials, the White House and the nation's Capitol in Washington. “The Vietnam Veterans Against the War demonstrated at these national shrines to focus attention on their cause,” a Park Service spokesman declared, “and now that things have quieted downs the stature of the shrines in the minds of the public has seemed to increased. Tourists want to be associated with an event of historical significance and they are flocking to the Statue of Liberty and the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials so they can say, ‘I was there a day—or a week or a month—after the demonstrations.'” In light of this, would the Park Service welcome new demonstrations? “We have stepped up security around the clock with additional plainclothesmen and uniformed police to avoid further incidents,” the Park Service spokesman said.

To the Editor:
CAMBRIDGE, Mass.—A few months ago I was in Saigon with an American student delegation. My most moving experience there was meeting 21 prisoners at a reception center in a Buddhist pagoda, all of whom had been released within the preceding two to three weeks. They had been in prison from three to fifteen years. About half of them were out of the tiger cages on Con Son Island. Themarks of suffering were visible upon them. One had been totally blinded by what we were told is a disciplinary device at Con Son: throwing lime down on the prisoners. One had lost a leg. Several had difficulty walking.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 9—After three days of attacks, North Vietnamese troops were still blocked today with heavy losses in their attempts to overrun Ban Nhik, the last Laotian Government foothold on the Boloven Plateau in• southern Laos.
WASHINGTON—Once again President Nixon has shown snore political courage in Indochina than all of his opponents and critics put together.
QUANGTRI, South Vietnam, Jan. 9—The refugees, many of them barefoot, stood on the shiny airstrip early yesterday morning holding clumsy bundles and shivering babies and looking fearful of the big American airplanes and the long voyage ahead.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 9 (AP)—The South Vietnamese Government began an investigation today Into one of the worst terrorist attacks of the war. Authorities said that of the more than 100 casualties, some might have been killed or injured by being trampled in the panic that followed a grenade explosion.
Mrs. Cora M. Weiss of the Bronx, co‐chairman of the Committee of Liaison with Families of Servicemen Detained in North Vietnam, said here yesterday that she had been informed by North Vietnam that Capt. Lawrence Gene Stoltz and First Lieut. Dale Francis Koons of the Air Force were dead. A photograph of their identification cards and other items released by North Vietnam was ‘published yesterday in The New: York Times.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Jan. 9 — There are firm indica tions that the 12,000‐man Viet namese Airborne Division will be sent to the Central Highlands soon to counter what high American and Vietnamese offi cials say is an imminent Com munist offensive. However, many field officers here on the scene express doubt that such an offensive will take place.
PHILADELPHIA, Jan. 10—Senator Hubert H. Humphrey formally announced his candidacy for President today with a declaration that “our most urgent immediate need is to end the war” in Southeast Asia—“and to do it now.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 10 (UPI) —The Supreme Court let stand today lower‐court opinions that investment — company officials who profit from private, inside deals in securities handled by their concerns are punishable under a previously untested 30‐year‐old law.
OTTAWA, Jan. 10—Ameri cans who fled here to avoid service in Vietnam, already un certain because of the diffi culty of finding jobs, have a new quandary: whether to re turn home if Congress approved an amnesty. And the proposal itself appears to be making jobs harder to find.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 10 (Reuters)—A Vietcong attack within six miles of downtown Saigon was reported today by the South Vietnamese command.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass.—When I went to Saigon with an American student delegation, one of the things most on my mind was to connect with Catholic opinion there. There are about forty million Catholics in the United States, many of whom think that a main object of the war in Vietnam is to protect Catholics from Communists. My first intimation that this may not be the whole story was a statement issued Oct. 15, 1969, signed by 93 Catholic Vietnamese living in Europe and “a great number of Catholics in Vietnam whose names cannot be opportunely published.”
MACON, Ga., Jan. 11 (UPI) — Mayor Ronnie Thompson, noting the recent release of James R. Hoffa, former head of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, sent President Nixon a telegram today asking that First Lieut. William L. Cal ley Jr. be freed. The lieutenant was convicted of murder in con nection with the killings of South Vietnamese civilians at the hamlet of Mylai in 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 11—A South Vietnamese mili tary spokesman confirmed reports today that Saigon was pulling its forces out of Krek in eastern Cambodia in a move ap parently intended to bolster the Government's defenses around the capital. The Government is known to believe that Saigon may be a target of a Commu nist offensive in mid‐February at the time of the Lunar New Year holidays.
In his letter (Dec. 30) Patrick J. Herrity points to the United States policy of Vietnamization and calls for a similar policy of Germanization to end the need for stationing United States troops in the Federal Republic.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 11—The United States com mand said today that a North Vietnamese missile site near Tchepone, deeper and farther south in the Laotian panhandle than one has ever been re ported before, fired two sur face‐to‐air missiles yesterday morning at an American fight er‐bomber that was attacking enemy supply trails.
I was grieved to read Prof. Harvey Cox’ recent Op‐Ed article, “Wild Blue Yonder Revisited,” because it plays games with the facts.
QUANGTRI, South Viet nam, Jan. 8—In the northern most hamlet of South Viet nam, which lies three miles below the demilitarized zone, the villagers are more trou bled by their own soldiers' cruelty and looting than by the threat of North Viet namese attack.
SAIGON, Wednesday, Jan. 12 (AP)—A small hand of enemy commandos slipped into the big United States air base at Bien hoa just outside of Saigon to day and blew up a revetment containing small‐arms ammu nition, the Seventh Air Force announced.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 11— The remote town of Tchepone in the panhandle of southern Laos, now a bombed‐out ruin, is a familiar place‐name in the records of conflict in Indochina.
HANOVER, N.H., Jan. 11— John Kerry, the war critic and spokesman for Vietnam Veter ans Against the War, told a Dartmouth College audience of 300 persons here last night to “get into politics and make the system work.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 12 (AP)—Enemy shelling and ground attacks in South Vietnam rose today to the high est level for any 24‐hour period since early last October, the Saigon command reported.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 12 (AP)—North Vietnamese forces captured two Government po sitions on high ground over looking the embattled base of Long Tieng, informed sources here reported today.
TAYNINH, Vietnam, Jan. 12 (UPI)—A unit of the Cambo dian Army has been disbanded by common consent of its 2,400 officers and men—all of whom deserted their post in a Cambo dian rubber plantation, changed to civilian clothes and scattered into South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 12—By the soft light of electric can dles, Senator Vance Hartke to day gave seven Washington cor respondents a first look at his Presidential campaign.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Jan. 12 (AP)—About 3,000 families were reported today to have fled the Krek region of eastern Cambodia in the wake of first a South Vietnamese and then a Cambodian pullout from that strongpoint on Route 7.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 13 (UPI)—The United States command said today that five Americans were killed in Indochina war action and 47 wounded in the first week of 1972.
SOUINGHE, South Vietnam, Jan. 11—After the heartache and uncertainty of leaving home, and a short‐lived epi demic of airsickness, the 1,500 pioneers of South Vietnam's most ambitious refugee resettle ment project are taking over their new village and say they are eager to start a new life.
PARIS, Jan. 13—The Viet cong charged today that the United States and the Saigon Government were planning to accelerate next month the movement of civilians from the northern provinces of South Vietnam so as to create a free‐fire zone in which tac tical nuclear weapons could be deployed.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13— President Nixon announced to day that 70,000 more troops would be withdrawn from South Vietnam over the next three months—a move that will re duce the authorized American force to 69,000 by May 1.
To the Editor:
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Jan. 13 (Reuters)—The Cambodian military command today an nounced a new operation involv ing South Vietnamese troops deep inside southern Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 13 (AP)—Enemy ground forces reportedly struck hard at South Vietnamese outposts today in the third day of intensified fighting.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 14 (UPI) — North Vietnamese forces reportedly commanded almost the entire ridgeline sur rounding the key military base of Long Tieng today, but Gov ernment mercenaries were still said to hold the installation it self despite heavy mortar and artillery attacks.
A graduate student in ad vanced chemistry at Adelphi University was held yesterday in $250,000 bail on charges he planned to blow up a Defense Department facility in Garden City, L. I., to protest “the con tinuing war in Vietnam.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 14 (AP)—A United States jet fighter‐bomber attacked a mo bile enemy‐missile unit today only three miles north of the demilitarized zone, which straddles the border between the two Vietnams.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 14—Sen ator Edmund S. Muskie's bid for the Democratic Presidential nomination will be endorsed Monday by three United States Senators and by three leading Democrats in Ohio.
The seesaw war in Laos has annually brought a winter dry‐season advance by the Communist forces toward the Government‐held Mekong Valley along the Thailand border. Later, under pressure from American air power and air‐supplied Lao and Meo ground troops, the Communists usually have pulled back again to shorter lines of supply in the rainy season, when mud and washouts have made a morass of ground routes. This scenario has repeated itself with minor variations virtually every year.
To THE EDITOR:
Those who lose in the ballot box or on the battlefield carry their case to the court of history. It is an ancient and honorable form of appeal which has enlivened the writing of history for centuries. In the United States today, the revulsion against the Vietnam war and against some of the wider military and political involvements of this country around the world has produced an audience for revisionist historical studies which argue the case for old minority viewpoints.
WASHINGTON—Whether or not the Indochinese war becomes a major issue between the Republicans and Demo crats next fall, one thing is obvious: Vietnam will almost certainly play a major role in the Democrats' struggle for their party's nomination.
FLAGSTAFF, Ariz., Jan. 15— Mayor Lindsay of New York urged the youth of the nation today to put aside any bitter ness or frustration they might harbor because of the Vietnam war or domestic problems and play a full role in the political process.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 14—Now Just a minute, Hubert Humphrey:
The following article, on the Vietnam prisoner‐of‐war issue and other questions, was writ ten for The Associated Press by an American lawyer who has handled civil‐rights matters and servicemen's cases. He recently spent a week in Hanoi, where he had lengthy discussions with leaders of a Government‐spon sored group dealing with Amer ican affairs.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15—The Association of the Bar of the City of New York has asked the President and Congress to con vene an inquiry into what it said was compelling evidence that serious breaches of the law of war have been committed by all parties in the Indochina war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 15—North Vietnam has moved its mobile missile launchers closer to South Vietnam's northern frontier than ever be fore, leading to new engage ments with United States fight ers within three miles of the border.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 15 (AP)—Government sources reported today that South Viet nam was replacing the com mander of an army division in the threatened Central High lands, in a continuing shake‐up of senior military officials.
WASHINGTON—“Ladies and gentle men,” said the President, “I am announcing today the withdrawal of an additional 70,000 troops from Vietnam over the next three months. This means that our troop ceiling will he down to 69,000 by May 1 … There will be another announcement that will be made before May 1 with regard to a further withdrawal. …”
SAIGON, South Vietnam Jan. 15. (Reuters)—Fifteen civilians were killed when a funeral vehicle struck a mine in South Vietnam's nothern province of Quangnam, the Saigon high command announced today.
VIENTIANE, Laos — For years, the war in Laos has followed a repeti tive pattern. In the winter dry sea sons the North Vietnamese and their Pathet Lao allies have overrun towns and territories, only to withdraw be fore Government counterattacks when the summer rains came. It is winter again, but this time things are begin ning to look different.
HONG KONG, Jan. 16 (Reu ters) — North Vietnam warned Thailand today of the conse quences of her involvement in the Indochina war, the North Vietnam press agency reported. The Hanoi daily, Nhan Dan, quoted by the agency, said:
KANSAS CITY, Mo., Jan. 16 —An ecumenical assembly ex amining the attitude of organ ized religion toward the war in Vietnam charged today that the Nixon Administration's Vi etnamization policy was fun damentally immoral because it “forces Asian people to be our proxy army, dying in our places for our supposed interests.”
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 16 — United States jet fighters met a North Vietnam ese MIG‐21 over northern Laos for the first time this year, but the enemy plane fled with a barrage of air‐to‐air mis siles exploding harmlessly at its tail, the United States com mand reported today.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16 (UPI) —Results of the urine tests for drug use conducted by the armed services, and made avail able today, indicate that the drug problem is largely con fined to the Army and to Viet nam.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Jan. 16 (Reuters)—More than half the North Vietnamese troops stationed in the tem ple city of Angkor in north west Cambodia have left the 1,000‐year‐old ruins to fight elsewhere, military sources said today.
Frost flowers melted off store windows and New Yorkers doffed their mufflers as the bitter cold that had struck the metropolitan area Sunday mod erated yesterday.
TORONTO, Jan. 17—A panel of six Americans who described themselves as “war resisters in Canada” said today that they opposed “the current ‘amnesty’ proposals in the United States.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 17 (AP)—United States warplanes flew more than 200 strikes today against North Vietnamese supply routes and depots in Laos as part of an intensified campaign against reported enemy preparations for an offensive.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 17 — The dustoffs, un armed Army helicopters that evacuate wounded Ameri can and South Vietnamese soldiers while giving them emergency treatment, will be in Vietnam as long as there are any United States troops here.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy proposed last night that the United Nations be requested to undertake a systematic effort to restore and rehabilitate the people of North and South Viet nam, Laos and Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam„ Jan. 18 (AP) — The United States command reported to day that two North Vietnamese MIG jets darted across the border into Laos yesterday and fired three missiles at two American fighter‐bombers but missed.
Seymour Hersh, the Pulitzer Prize‐winning journalist who first wrote in detail about the massacre of civilians at Mylai 4, has reported that, according to Army documents, 347 men, women and children were killed in the South Vietnamese hamlet by American troops. The usually accepted figure had been under 200.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 18— The 92d Congress reconvened today with the Democratic lead ers of the House and Senate striking the common theme that legislating should be placed ahead of politicking.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 18— North Vietnamese troops who have been staging attacks in the Long Tieng area of north ern Laos since New Year's Eve are reported to have been en countering increasing pressure in recent days from the Lao tian defenders.
SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 18 (AP)—West Coast shipowners imposed a ban today on mili tary shipments, including guns and ammunition for Vietnam, because of the renewed Pacific Coast dock strike.
The United States end North Viet nam are now trapping one another in a tragic military situation, which bene fits neither side, and might be resolved to the benefit of both by a fairly modest compromise.
Business is still recovering slowly from the recession. In December, industrial output rose seven‐tenths of 1 per cent, but nearly half the rise was due to the increase in coal output after last fall's strike. Industrial produc tion went up only 3 per cent in the past year—and is still 3.7 per cent below its peak in 1969.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19—The Senate Democratic Policy Com mittee revived the Vietnam is sue in the Senate today by adopting a resolution calling on the President to withdraw all United States forces from Indo china within six months, con tingent upon the release of prisoners of war.
SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 19 (AP) — The Pacific Maritime Association reversed itself to day and ordered its member shipowners to begin handling military cargo immediately at struck West Coast ports, ac cording to Edmund Flynn, president of the association.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Jan. 19 (AP)—The Cambodian high command said today that two or three new North Vietnamese regiments, totaling 5,000 to 10,000 troops, had moved down the Ho Chi Minh trail into Cambodia.
The eagerness of ship operators to speed White House intervention in the unreasonable longshore strike that has again shut down all West Coast ports is easy to understand. But that eagerness provided no excuse for the concerted decision of employers in this highly subsidized industry to refuse military cargo for Vietnam, especially since the whole point of maritime subsidies is national defense.
WASHINGTON Jan. 19—A spokesman for the Pentagon declined today to comment on renewed charges that the Army had covered up the massacre at Mylai in South Vietnam in 1968. Jerry W. Friedheim, the Defense Department spokes man, said “our legal officers feel public comment at this time is inappropriate because the Calley case is still pending review.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 19—The United States command announced that a Navy Phan tom jet shot down an enemy MIG‐21 deep inside North Viet nam today. It was the first MIG reported downed in 22 months.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20—Following is a detailed examination of the written State of the Union Message:
PARIS, Jan. 20 (Reuters)—The United States today presented to the Hanoi delegation at the Vietnam peace talks a list of 14 American pilots shot down over North Vietnam and asked why they were not on the North Vietnamese list of United States prisoners of war.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20 —North Vietnam has reiterated, in a message to The New York Times, its apparent position that American prisoners will not he released until the Nixon Administration agrees both to withdraw all its forces from South Vietnam and to end its support of the Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
SAIGON, Jan. 20 (UPI) —Five American servicemen were killed in the Indochina war last week, the same number as the week before, United States spokesmen said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 20 (AP)—Ten thousand or more South Vietnamese troops have reportedly begun a sweep 45 miles northwest of Saigon to disrupt any enemy plans for an offensive near the capital.
Dr. Daniel Ellsberg scoffed last night at the President's promise of a generation of peace, saying, “He's winding down the war like he's winding down my indictment.”
Richard M. Freeland was born in 1941 and presumably, came of intellectual age in the late 1950's, give or take an adolescence. He received a solid education at Amherst College, the University of Bristol and the University of Pennsylvania (where he wrote the dissertation from which the present book was expanded). He has worked in Washington for two Congressmen. He has been to Vietnam on a United States Information Agency interneship. He has taught history in several institutions. And he is evidently an excellent scholar and researcher. With all these advantages, he has been able to give us an aerial photograph of the past that reveals many perspectives not available to people who experienced World War la and its aftermath on the ground, as it were. So one studies “The Truman Doctrine and the Origins of McCarthyism” with curiosity and some excitement to understand the history from which we are now trying to awake.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20 (UPI) — The police blocked relatives of prisoners of war, the mother of a G.I. killed in Vietnam and several hundred supporters from conducting an end‐the‐war vigil on the Capitol steps during President Nixon's State of the Union Address.
South Vietnam, Jan. 18 — In the field — which means elephant grass, bamboo so thick and so tough a man must hack his way through it and heat that makes it punishing to walk a few hundred yards with an 80‐pound pack—the infantrymen wait for a helicopter that links them to the outside world every three days.
President Nixon paid scant attention to the war in Vietnam in his State of the Union messages, perhaps because he genuinely believes he can make that interminable conflict a nonissue in the Presidential campaign. That is most unlikely if the President clings to the policy he briefly reiterated in his written message.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 21 (AP)—An intensified bombing campaign by United States B‐52's continued for the fifth day today with attacks on suspected troop concentrations and supply dumps in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam near the Laotian border.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 21 (Agence France‐Presse) —Defense preparations against a possible American attack were reported under way today throughout North Vietnam.
May I suggest her Ladyship extend her voyages to include Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia where she would be able to physically enjoy this very American form of culture.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 21—Although the Mayor of their city and one of their Congressional colleagues are running for the Democratic Presidential nomination, the Democratic House members from New York City for the most part are shying away from Presidential endorsemerits for now. Some New York Democratic Representatives said that they were not about to commit themselves to anyone until they saw who in the crowded field was still in the running after a few Presidential primaries in other states.
At the Oakland Army Terminal, in California, Specialist 4 Christopher J. Jimenez received a unique honor: an official ceremony proclaiming him the 1,750,000th American serviceman to return from Vietnam since 1961, when the first American troops were sent there.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 21—Congressional Democrats presented their own “state of the union message” today on a nationwide television program, accusing President Nixon of neglecting problems on the home front and prolonging the war in Indochina.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 21—Senator Robert J. Dole, Republican National Committee chairman, criticized the leading Democratic Presidential aspirants today and proposed that a special Congressional committee investigate the Vietnam war “to place the responsibility where it lies.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 22 (AP)—The South Vietnamese command reported that 35 enemy soldiers were killed in a series of skirmishes in South Vietnam today, and South Korean headquarters said its troops had killed 38 more of the enemy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 22 — Thefts, burglaries and armed robberies have risen sharply throughout the country during the weeks before the Lunar New Year, or Tet, as Vietnamese search for money to pay traditional holiday expenses.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 22—Despite the most serious North Vietnamese campaign of recent years in northern. Laos, the Premier, Prince Souvanna Phouma, said today that his Government would not ask the United States for more military aid “unless the situation gets worse.”
TOKYO. Jan. 22 (AP)—China charged today that the United States and South Vietnam were forcing inhabitants of the northern provinces of South Vietnam to move to “disguised concentration camps in the south.”
VIENTIANE, Jan. 22 (Agence France‐Presse)—The airfield and military post of Mouong Phou, 28 miles southeast of the key road junction at Phou Khoun, fell to North Vietnamese and other Communist forces today, military sources reported here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 22 (UPI) — North Vietnam's army and air force have been told of a “very favorable new situation” and ordered to step up military training.
PARIS, Jan. 22—The North Vietnamese announced here today that more than 300 parcels, weighing almost two tons, had been delivered to American prisoners of war during the Christmas and New Year season.
Citing “compelling evidence that serious breaches of the laws of war have been committed by all parties” in Indochina, the Association of the Bar of the City of New York has urged President Nixon to appoint a national commission to study American observance the laws of war in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 23 (AP)—United States fighterbombers knocked out two enemy antiaircraft guns and damaged another in strikes inside the demilitarized zone yesterday, the United States command announced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—For the Americans in Vietnam, 1971 was the year that American troop strength began to show the effects of withdrawal — down from 337,000 to fewer than 160,000 at the end of the year.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23 (AP)—The Senate Democratic leader, Mike Mansfield of Montana, called today for enlargement of the Vietnam peace talks to include the problems of Laos and Cambodia and suggested that the talks be held at some place closer to Southeast Asia than Paris.
To the Editor: Your Jan. 4 editorial “Hostages in Hanoi” unfortunately added to the superficiality characteristic of much comment on the P.O.W. issue. Apart from the merits of political figures, it is vital to an understanding of what is at stake for the victims that difficulties which the North Vietnamese and many Americans choose to ignore be understood and considered.
PAKSE, Laos, Jan. 23—North Vietnam's dry‐season offensive has plunged Laos into the severest fighting and heaviest losses she has known, Sisouk na Champassak, the Defense Minister, has disclosed.
HARRISBURG, Pa., Jan. 23 —“We have a wonderful group of judges. There are a lot of crooks around here but the judges are good. ‘Dix’ [Federal District Judge R. Dixon Herman] is one of my boys. And he's intelligent. We made him County Solicitor.” M. Harvey Taylor the 95‐year‐old retired political boss of Dauphin County (Harrisburg), was discussing the local political and social scene on the eve of the trial of the Harrisburg Seven, who have been charged with conspiring to kidnap Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security affairs, as a hostage for ending the war in Vietnam; to blow up the heating systems of Federal buildings in Washington, and to vandalize draft records in nine states.
The ill‐starred war in Laos is proving a disaster. An early dry‐season offensive of unprecedented strength by the North Vietnamese has taken a heavy toll of American airpower diverted to several Laotian fronts. Embarrassing defeats have been inflicted on Americandirected Laotian and Thai forces. The drive has approached Thailand's Mekong River border with Laos in the south, and apparently has activated Chinese antiaircraft crews against American planes in northern Laos.
SAIGON, Jan. 24 (UPI)—The United States command reported today that 4,400 American troops were pulled out of Vietnam last week, cutting the American force in the war zone to 143,700 men. It was the lowest number of United States servicemen in Vietnam since September, 1965, when 132,300 were here.
QUINHON, South Vietnam. Jan. 24 (UPI)—The United States Army has opened its gates to Vietnamese prostitutes at several bases in South Vietnam and Army spokesmen said such a thing is apparently permissible under current regulations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 24—The United States Command today reported three more attacks by American aircraft on North Vietnamese missile and antiaircraft sites, making a total of five such incidents reported in the last 48 hours.
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 25 (AP) — The National Peace Action Coalition says it has chosen Los Angeles as the West Coast site of an antiwar demonstration April 22.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—President Nixon's eight‐point peace proposal was applauded tonight by Congressional supporters of the Administration, but was greeted with a mixture of skepticism and surprise by critics of the Vietnam War.
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's televised address last night on Vietnam policy, as recorded by The New York Times:
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—They White House explained tonight that President Nixon had decided to reveal the details of secret Vietnam peace negotiations because secrecy had fostered unacceptable political divisions at home.
Seymour M. Hersh, the journalist who first disclosed the details of the Mylai massacre, has assorted that members of the Army's Americal Division destroyed documents about the incident to protect the officers involved.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—Following is the text a proposal by the Governments of the United States and South Vietnam for a negotiated settlement of the Indochina conflict, as released by the White House tonight:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 26—President Nguyen Van Thieu endorsed in a radio address to the nation today the suggestion for a new South Vietnamese presidential election and other parts of the latest allied peace plan.
The Vietnam peace proposals which President Nixon made public last night represent a major advance over the Administration's previous public positions on ending the war. They therefore merit support from all shades of American opinion and a positive response from the other side.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 25 (AP)—The United States command reported today for the second day that American planes had attacked three missile‐radar sites in North Vietnam.
Stock prices fell yesterday morning, rallied briskly at midsession on hopes for new Vietnam peace proposals and then moved lower again in afternoon trading.
HARRISBURG, Pa., Jan. 25 — Three prospective women jurors in the conspiracy trial of the Rev. Philip F. Berrigan and six other antiwar activists, spoke up in court today to reveal their personal feelings against the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 26 (Reuters)—Gen. William C. Westmoreland, Army Chief of Staff, arrived here today for talks with South Vietnamese and American military officials on the progress of the war.
TOKYO, Wednesday, Jan. 26 —Japan welcomed President Nixon's latest Vietnam peace plan today as a hope for a settlement of the conflict.
It has become almost a cliché that President Nixon always deals more effectively with the politics of his problems than he deals with the problems themselves. And this is what he appears to have done in announcing his secret peace negotiations with Hanoi. Politically, it is an effqctive move. It is Nearly awkward for his political opponents, who have been urging him to offer to set a date for total United States withdrawal from Vietnam and make arrangements for internationally supported elections in that country with some neutral government in power in Saigon.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—President Nixon disclosed to the American public tonight a proposal to end the war in Indochina that he said had been offered in secret channels three months ago but ignored by the North Vietnamese.
OTTAWA, Jan, 26—Mitchell W. Sharp, Canada's Secretary of State for External Affairs, today applauded President Nixon's Vietnam peace proposal as a “serious effort” by the United States and South Vietnam to negotiate an end to the war.
The stock market sagged yesterday under further profit taking and to a lesser degree, the negative tone of North Vietnam's initial response to peace proposals disclosed Tuesday, night by President Nixon.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's specialist in super‐secret diplomacy, divulged some clues today about his modus operandi in going to Paris to meet with North Vietnamese officials there.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Jan. 26—In what appears to signal a switch in enemy military strategy, the North Vietnamese press and radio have emphasized that the withdrawal of American forces has preoared the way for “big annihilating attacks” by main forces.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26—A series of secret diplomatic efforts to end the war in Vietnam formed the central disclosure made by President Nixon last night and discussed today by Henry A. Kissinger, his adviser on national security. Following is a listing of some of the formerly secret events, with a comparison of the publicly known and privately held activities that surrounded them:
President Nixon, with understandable satisfaction, remarked during his Tuesday night broadcast that it was “difficult to see how anyone, regardless of his past position on the war, could now say that we have not gone the extra mile in offering a settlement that is fair to everybody concerned.”
TOKYO, Jan. 26 (UPI)—Senator Buckley expressed some skepticism today about President Nixon's proposals for peace in Vietnam. The Senator said he did not want to come up with “snap judgments” about Mr. Nixon's moves, but he offered, “random observations.”
WASHINGTON. Jan. 26—The apparent failure of President Nixon's new peace proposals to break the deadlock in Paris raises the question, What comes next in the Vietnam conflict?
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26—Henry A. Kissinger appealed today for public understanding and support of the Administration's peace initiatives in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26—Following are excerpts from the news conference held today by Henry A. Kissinger, assistant to the President for national security affairs, on Mr. Nixon's eightpoint proposal for peace in Indochina:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 27 (AP)—The United States command announced another air strike against a radar missile site in North Vietnam yesterday as the heightened air war in Indochina continued.
PARIS, Jan. 26—Following are the texts of statements in response to President Nixon issued today by the delegations of North Vietnam and the Vietcong at the Paris talks. The North Vietnamese statement was issued in English and the Vietcong statement in French.
PARIS, Jan. 26 — The Vietnamese Communists made it plain today that President Nixon's peace proposals last night were unacceptable.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—It is sadly clear to Vietnamese that the American Government not only interferes in but also controls South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 Senator Mike Mansfield, a leading critic of the Administration's policies on Vietnam, applauded President Nixon's peace proposals today as a “long step forward” that he hoped could lead to a negotiated settlement of the war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26—The Vietnamese Communists’ negative reaction to the latest allied peace proposals, which was expected, tells much not only about why peace has been impossible to attain here but also about why the American and South Vietnamese Governments may have decided to make the secret negotiations of the past 30 months public now. During the past two months, North Vi etnamese forces have scored signal victories in conventional battles against outclassed Cambodian and Lao tian troops on Route 6 northeast of Pnompenh and on the Paine des Jarres and the Boloven Plateau in Laos. At the same time American and South Vietnamese officials here have been saying that they expect a large Communist offensive in South Vietnam by the middle of February, that is, over Tet, the Lunar New Year holiday, and just before President Nixon makes his trip to Peking on Feb. 21.
Vice President Agnew denounced the Democratic critics of the Nixon Administration's Vietnam policy last night, charging that their criticism represented “the luxury of partisans out of power whose simple goal, to the exclusion of all others, is a return to power.”
The emphasis Presidential assistant Henry Kissinger has placed on the flexibility of the Administration's new Vietnam peace proposals strengthens hope that they may yet provide a key to ending this tragic conflict, despite their initial unacceptability to North Vietnam and the Vietcong.
SARASOTA, Fla., Jan. 27—President Nixon's account of his secret efforts to negotiate a peace in Indochina has clearly helped him in the Florida Presidential primary election campaign, and embarrassed the leading Democratic candidates for the Presidency.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27—Former President Lyndon B. Johnson said tonight that it was “a lot of bosh — tommy rot” that he had been misled by the military and his civilian advisers in his five years in the White House.
"Winter Soldier," which opened at the Whitney Museum yesterday as part of its New American Filmmakers Series, is a documentary feature composed entirely of Vietnam veterans' testimony, most of which was photographed and recorded during hearings in Detroit, Jan. 31-Feb. 2, 1971, sponsored by the Vietnam Veterans Against the War.It includes occasional official newsreel clips, as well as still photographs supplied by the testifying veterans (including one Brownie snapshot of a triumphant, smiling G.I. standing at the head of a newly murdered Vietnamese), but it is most agonizing in its young, barely molded words and faces—the record of men trying to make some sense of an experience that to them clearly makes no sense. Yet something very important is missing from the movie and, by extension it seems, from what might be called the American character.The movie is an oral history, told by former United States soldiers, sailors and marines who, for the most part, admit to having participated in various atrocities without question. What is obviously missing—and I suppose this is hardly news now—is some explanation as to how we could have managed to raise a couple of generations of people who could participate in the conduct described without experiencing the kind of sorrow that activates conscience. This, I assume, is the question that the film intends to raise.The other question, which is as much a moral question as a dramatic one, is what happened to change these men's minds, and when? At what point, for example, does a man, who could pose with the corpse of someone he has just shot, decide that he doesn't want to do this anymore? About halfway through "Winter Soldier" there is a moment that tells us about all the stories we are not hearing, when a clean-cut former G.I. recalls walking down a street in Cambridge and going out of his way to push a bearded student off the sidewalk. The student, he remembers, said simply: "You make it very difficult for anyone to get to know you."The former soldier then says something on the order of: "I told my wife about this, and she helped me straighten my head out."That is as close as "Winter Soldier" ever comes to providing an obligatory scene. The other conversions are unremembered. They take place silently, off-screen. All of which effectively limits the larger purposes of "Winter Soldier," even for one who is sympathetic to its ends. I suspect that one of the reasons that what happened could happen is that we live in a culture whose slang, among other things, persists in referring to the mind as the head. We refuse to make distinctions that can, in the long run, recognize the difference between life and death.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that despite Hanoi's public denunciations, he was “somewhat encouraged” by the absence of a North Vietnamese rejection of President Nixon's latest Vietnam peace plan at the Paris talks.
WASHINGTON—Snort of the negotiated settlement which we seek, and if we are to continue phasing down U.S. involvement in the war in a safe way, U.S. air activity in Southeast Asia— though diminishing— is absolutely essential.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 28 (AP) —Enemy forces reportedly staged two heavy attacks today in the southern half of South Vietnam. In the Central Highlands, South Vietnamese troops were said to have stumbled onto an enemy base camp yesterday and engaged in a major battle.
To the Editor: Senator Taft's bill of amnesty for young Americans imprisoned by the Nixon and Johnson Administrations is useful in directing attention to a vital problem, but it is based on a false assumption. It fails to lighten the burdens imposed by their elders; it adds new punishment and servitude.
WASHINGTON—About 1,400 Vietnamese refugees were recently moved from wretched refugee camps in Quangtri Province of I Corps, the northernmost region of South Vietnam, to another camp 450 miles to the south. Vietnamese refugees have never before been resettled so far from their former homes.
HONG KONG, Friday, Jan. 28 (Reuters)—China's official press agency reported without comment today President Nixon's eight‐point plan for peace in Southeast Asia.
PARIS, Jan. 27—The Vietnamese Communists insisted at the peace talks here today that there can be no Vietnam settlement until the United States first sets a specific date for total military withdrawal and ousts the present South Vietnamese Government.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27—The United States mentioned a possible figure of $2.5‐billion in aid for North Vietnam out of a possible total of $7.5‐billion for Indochina over five years during Henry A. Kissinger's secret talks with Hanoi officials in Paris, a White House official said tonight.
PARIS, Jan. 27 (UPI)—Allied spokesmen said after today's session of the peace talks that the North Vietnamese and Vietcong delegates had displayed interest in the eight‐point American plan.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 (UPI) —A young woman in a singing group. caused an embarrassed moment at a formal White House dinner tonight when she waved a placard and called to. President Nixon to stop the bombing in Vietnam.
MOSCOW, Jan. 28 (Reuters) —The first Soviet commentaries on President Nixon's peace proposals today were highly skeptical but avoided outright rejection.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 28 — President Nguyen Van 1Thieu agreed to the allies’ new peace proposals, including his offer to resign, even before his re‐election last Oct. 3, according to authoritative American sources.
SAIGON, South Victnam, Saturday, Jan. 29 (AP)—‐Enemy forces wounded 10 Americans and shot up a resupply helicopter in a flurry of fighting east of Saigon yesterday, the United States command said today.
HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 28 (Agence France‐Presse) — The Communist party newspaper Nhan Dan said today that North Vietnam would respond officially to President Nixon's proposals only after further clarification.
HONG KONG, Jan. 28.—Peking today denounced President Nixon's latest proposal for settlement of the war in Indochina as a “plan of aggression” and asserted that acceptance of the iVetnamese Communists demands was the only way out for the United States.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 —More than 123 members of Congress signed letters circulated by the Republican leadership today expressing support for President Nixon's eightpoint peace proposal for Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 28—There was a time not long ago when Government‐sanctioned banks were seldom seen by Americans or other foreigners in South Vietnam.
All available details in the senseless killing of two young police officers on the Lower East Side add up wanton, unprovoked murder. The patrolmen, Gregory Foster and Rocco Laurie, who had become friends on military duty in Vietnam, volunteered for service in community police unit and had personally earned high degree of neighborhood confidence.
SAIGON, Jan. 29 (AP)—Informed sources said today that South Vietnamese field commanders and police had been placed on stand‐by alert for any enemy offensive or increased attacks next month.
WASHINGTON—Last Tuesday, the day of President Nixon's speech on Vietnam, proved to be a sad day for our country. If one took the time to pierce the rhetoric, he found there a record of two and a half years of completely unproductive negotiations in Faris. The collapse of our negotiating effort was, compounded by President Nixon's decision to publicize the results of secret meetings so as practically to insure major difficulty in resuming effective off‐the‐record discussions:
President Nixon's peace plan, as revealed to the world in general and to the American electorate in particular last Tuesday night in his own special brand of TV spectacular, does represent a significant advance of the American position in the complex negotiating effort to bring an end to the Vietnam war. While Mr. Nixon's dramatic announcement may indeed have been timed to soften up American and world opinion for a massive renewal of aerial bombing in response to the anticipated major Tet offensive on the part of Hanoi, the fact remains that the proposals are substantial enough, and are flexible enough, to warrant more serious exploration from the naturally suspicious enemy than has yet been publicly evidenced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 29 (Reuters)—A radio report of a battle with Vietcong guerrillas on s outskirts yesterday, later officially denied, is the latest in a series of such incidents to confuse war, correspondents in Vietnam.
The Rev. Carl E. Creswell, an Episcopal chaplain in Vietnam at the time of the Mylai massacre, told a military court recently that he had mentioned a report of the incident to army superiors. “In hindsight, I feel I should have done more,” he added.
PARIS—President Nixon indicated that his adviser had seen the North Vietnamese 13 times. Mr. Kissinger corrected him: No, it was 12 times. A French radio commentator last week suggested yet another figure. Pretending that the divorced Mr. Kissinger was still married, the commentator jested that the Presidential aide was in trouble at home because he'd told his wife he had gone to Paris on official business 16 times.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 29—A forged identification card giving a false age usually costs a man trying to, avoid the draft more than $100. It costs twice as much in piasters‐80,000—to arrange for the transfer of a soldier to a, job in the rear where he be safe from combat, or nearer his family.
WASHINGTON—In an Administration plagued by major leaks, it was the best kept of secrets. For nearly 30 months, the negotiations had been conducted in the strictest secrecy, with Henry A. Kissinger, the President's national security adviser, slipping surreptitiously across the Atlantic for a dozen clandestine meetings with North Vietnamese representatives on the outskirts of Paris.
The outpouring this week of proposals and counterproposals, arguments and counterarguments, in Washington, Hanoi and Paris, has at least reiterated the point that the real issue of the war is political control of South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29—It is no longer enough to call him Professor Kissinger. He has transcended academia, has put professorship light‐years behind him. Tenure, the musty polysyllabics of the Blue Book, faculty parties with that cut‐rate California sherry, the smartly administered knuckle‐rapping which keeps the presumptuous undergraduate in his place —all these belong to a receding past.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29 (UPI) —An authoritative White House source said today that President Nixon called the plays for Henry A. Kissinger during the progress of secret negotiations with the North Vietnamese. Mr. Nixon's code name, the source said, was “Quarterback.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29—Senator George McGovern's Congressional investigation of the link between cholesterol and heart ailments, six months late’ getting under way, is now considered unlikely to occur at least until after the April 4 Presidential primaries in Wisconsin.
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla., Jan. 29—On the scale of popular interests in Florida these days, Presidential politics rats fairly low—well behind the weather, health tips, sports, prices, skyjackings or Disney World.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 —American intelligence sources reported today that political officers attached to North Vietnamese and Vietcong units were telling their troops that “decisive blows” must be dealt against United States and South Vietnamese forces while President Nixon visits China in February.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Monday. Jan. 31 (Agence France‐Presse)—Official communications out of Pnompenh were cut today, while the Information Ministry confirmed that the Cambodian Government was considering the possibility of secret talks with North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 31 (AP)—The South Vietnamese command announced today that its planes had destroyed three enemy tanks in the Central Highlands.
PARIS, Jan. 30—Prince Buu Hoi, an internationally known physicist and cancer researcher who had acted as a diplomatic troubleshooter for his native Vietnam, died of cancer at his home here Friday. He was 55 years old.
PEKING, Monday, Jan. 31 (Reuters)—Premier Chou Enlai said today that he thought it would not be possible to end the war in Indochina, especially in Vietnam, if the United States went ahead with its eight‐point peace plan.
BUDAPEST, Jan. 30 (UPI)—Premier Jeno Fock will leave for Hanoi tomorrow for talks with North Vietnamese leaders official sources said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Oct. 1 — An explosion ripped through a gun turret early today on the heavy cruis er Newport News, killing 19 sailors and injuring 10, the United States Navy announced. 
The stock market finally showed some snap last week; thanks to a midweek rally blossoming out of rumored Vietnam peace developments. Later, these rumors fell to earth, with both sides denying that a cease‐fire was at hand.
The writer of the following article, a special correspondent of The Associated Press, re turned to New York Friday night after spending 10 days in Hanoi covering the release of the three American prisoners of war.
ITHACA, N. Y., Sept. 30—A Cornell University senior ac cused of leading a window smashing melee last spring was found not guilty yesterday by a Tompkins County Court jury. The defendant, 20‐year‐old James R. Bean of Anchorage Alaska, had faced first‐degrer riot charges for allegedly hurt ing a rock at a Cornell building during a violent antiwar protes, on May 11. 
Senator George McGovern, in a three‐state sweep up the East Coast yesterday, used some of the harshest language of his campaign in accusing the Nixon Administration of being “scan dal‐ridden” and “corrupt.” 
EAST MEADOW, L. I. — Mrs. Irma Zigas, a long‐time activist in Women's Strike for Peace, thought she was as devoted to the cause as any American — until her adopted son announced he was joining a ship planning to run the blockade of Hai phong Harbor.
BIEN HOA AIR BASE, South Vietnam, Sept. 30 (AP)—The United States Air Force with drew today its last fighter bomber squadron in South Viet nam at this base 15 miles northeast of Saigon. 
SAN DIEGO, Sept. 30 (UPI) —The health of Lieut (jg) Norris Charles of the Navy, the third prisoner released by the North Vietnamese, was reported “with in normal limits yesterday by a Defense Department spokesman. 
SAIGON, Sept. 30, (Reuters) —North Vietnamese antiair craft gunners shot down a United States F‐111 fighter bomber on Thursday, the Hanoi radio reported today. 
LOS ANGELES, Sept. 30— “I just want to show that Nixon is not getting through to the people,” said Ken Marenus, as he stood across the street from the sweeping, flood‐lit curve of the Century Plaza Hotel. “The war is still on, a lot of lives are still being lost.” 
MONTGOMERY, Ala., Sept. 30 (UPI)—Maj, Edward K. Elias, of the Air Force, who returned to the United States with Lieu tenant Gartley Thursday, was reported today to be spending a “happy, relaxed” weekend with his family at Maxwell Air Force Base here. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Oct. 1 — United States fighter‐bombers have attacked four North Vietnamese air bases, an American spokesman said yesterday, dealing what he described as the heaviest blow to date against enemy aircraft on the ground.
Senate hearings into the unauthor ized air strikes ordered against North Vietnam by Air Force Gqn. John S. Lavelle ended on something of a quizzi cal note last week. Echoes of Catch‐22.
WASHINGTON — To the scores of newsmen assembled at New York's Kennedy Airport, it was a joyous scene—three freed American pilots le turning home from a prison camp in North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 30—Any list of the most lively, interesting persons to serve in the Nixon Administration would probably be headed by Dr. Henry Kissinger, a Rockefeller Re publican; John B. Connally, a Johnson Democrat, and Daniel P. Moynihan, a Kennedy Democrat. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 30—Saigon police report ed today that during the week ended last Monday they had arrested 122 army deserters and 202 draft evaders in the capital as part of a new campaign. The police also were said to have rounded up 510 curfew violators, 98 military men with out proper papers, 146 civilians without proper papers or with false identification, 296 “illegal residents,” and three suspected Communists. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 30—The American pilots imprisoned in North Vietnam have generally maintained an extremely high level of internal discipline based, to a degree far greater than previously known, on the United States code of conduct for captured officers. 
Lieut. (jg.) Mark L. Gartley, who returned to the United States Thursday after spending more than four years in a North Vietnamese prison camp, was reported yesterday to be “medi cally, quite healthy.” 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 1—Sen ator George McGovern, whose Presidential candidacy was founded on a pledge to obtain peace in Vietnam, will disclose in the next few days a detailed plan to end the war, his wife said here today. 
The press continues to report peace rumors. Every time Henry Kissinger travels, there is another flurry of hope ful speculation. Secret talks between Mr. Kissinger and Le Due Tho take place from time to time. But still there is no pease—the bombings, the fighting, the killing go on. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 1—Hanoi has accused the United States of dropping insect larvae over the South Vienamese province of Quangngai to destroy rice and other crops. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Mon day, Oct. 2 (UPI)—United States Army helicopters supporting Government' troops on the cen tral coast of South Vietnam re turned fire yesterday from hamlet a few hundred yards from the district capital of Mo duc and wounded a number of South Vietnamese soldiers and civilians, military sources said. 
WASHINGTON—There is one hu man matter that is virtually unmen tionable in the official American pro nouncements about the Vietnam war. It concerns the casualties and refu gees — practically none of whom are white —caused by present bombing policies over allied, enemy and neu tral countries in Indochina. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 1—Sen ator George McGovern, whose Presidential candidacy was founded on a pledge to obtain peace in Vietnam, will disclose in the next few days a detailed plan to end the war, his wife said here today. 
In Richard Nixon's Washington, Henry Kissinger stands out like Kili manjaro on an arid plain. He is a man of broad intellect in a narrow and anti‐intellectual world, a self‐confident man with a sense of humor among the defensive and the humorless.It has always been unlikely that the Communists would believe another unsupported promise to keep hands off Vietnam, least of all from a Presi dent whose rhetoric seems constantly to escalate the American interest in a non‐Communist Saigon. That Is why Hanoi has sought formal agreement with the U.S. on the political future of Vietnam—as an assurance against renewed intervention. 
"The summer soldier," wrote Tom Paine in 1776, and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country."The hero of "Summer Soldiers," Hiroshi Teshigahara's new Japanese film, is an American G.I. named Jim, a dark-haired, sad-eyed, exhausted, young Vietnam veteran who, while on leave in Japan, tries to desert from the Army and winds up, weeks later, back where he started in a state of controlled despair."Summer Soldiers" is an intelligent, level-headed movie that refuses—bravely, I think—to deal in the sort of hysteria that denies the intention of other antiwar films. Mr. Teshigahara, the director whose "Woman in the Dunes" was seen here eight years ago, and John Nathan, the American who wrote the screenplay, have made an antiwar film thousands of miles from any battlefront, in terms of culture shocks, the psychology of loneliness and people working at cross-purposes with the best of intentions. Which may be why "Summer Soldiers" is more witty than moving, and less tragic than Jim's eventual fate would lead you to believe.The soldier is first taken in by a good-hearted, not particularly bright B-girl. "You gonna give me a hard time?" she says to cheer him up. He smiles, and she says it again and again and again, which are a few times too many. She, in turn, puts Jim in touch with the Deserters' Aid Committee, a group of liberal-to-radical Japanese do-gooders who ask Jim why he's deserted, then argue passionately among themselves about whether or not Jim's lack of ideology is important."Summer Soldiers" describes no special dramatic parabola. It moves horizontally, as Jim does, in one-night stands, from family to family, most of whom treat the soldier as an exotic object. Jim, played by Keith Sykes, remains almost as mysterious to us, essentially decent and mostly inarticulate, Mr. Teshigahara, however, has a lovely time studying the attitudes of what a Japanese radical manual ("How to Resist Arrest") calls the "host families."The director has as much sympathy for these people when they are being silly or smug or insensitive as when they are being selfless and understanding. One of Jim's hosts attempts to teach him Japanese and is shocked when the American prefers to spend the night with the bar girl. The G.I. spends another night planted in front of the TV set watching a Japanese-dubbed Lucille Ball show. He can't understand a word, but the faces are as familiar as the intensity of the canned laughter.On still another night in another middle-class household, he plays a guitar and sings some songs he has written. Says the father: "You could go on television as 'The Singing Deserter,' wearing dark glasses. You could give the money to The Movement." "Yes," says Jim, though he realizes he has no real interest in any movements.From time to time, Mr. Teshigahara cuts from the narrative to an interview with a Spanish-American deserter, Miguel (Greg Antonacci), who, unlike Jim, knows exactly what he's doing, which is preparing for revolution. Miguel jogs, he studies, he disciplines himself. "Life is beautiful," he says in that glum way of someone trying to convince himself.These interludes are out of keeping with the rest of the film, which actually has less to do with specific issues than with loneliness of such desperate degree that it becomes a type of humiliation. Toward the end of the film, two Japanese school girls, members of The Movement, try to pick up the soldier in a bar in order to help him. He turns on them: "What if I were just an ordinary guy? Would you be interested then?" They wouldn't. It is not, perhaps, a fair question, but it makes one of the film's most sorrowful, even Buñuelian points: to recognize charity is to accept insult."Summer Soldiers" was shown last night at the New York Film Festival.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. I (AP)—Maj. Gen. Alexander M. Haig, a special envoy of President Nixon, arrived in Saigon today for a three‐day series of meetings with top South Vietnamese and United States officials, including Pres ident Nguyen Van Thieu and Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker. 
To the Editor:
CAIRO, Oct. 1—Egypt and the Soviet Union have started to work toward improved rela tions on a new basis, without any Soviet military presence on Egyptian soil but with friendly cooperation in economic and other fields. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 1 (AP)—The cruiser New port News steamed out of the Vietnam war zone today and headed for the Philippines with the bodies of 19 sailors killed in the worst United States naval disaster this year. 
The first of, the three newly freed American pilots to hold an American news conference yesterday called his treatment in a North Vietnam prison camp “humane,” affirmed that he had not been mistreated and pic tured prison conditions as steadily improving. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 3 (AP)—A sud den upsurge in North Viet namese and Vietcong rocket and mortar attacks and sabotage was reported yesterday by the Saigon command. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 3—The United States command here an nounced today that one of the swing‐wing F‐111 fighters that returned to the Indochina con flict last week has been lost over North Vietnam. 
A 22‐year‐old. United Parcel Service driver was killed on his first day at work yesterday when another truck struck the one he was driving, throwing him out and pinning him under his own truck. The dead driver, Elias Maldonado, who was re cently discharged from the Air Force after duty in Vietnam, lived at 405 Claremont Park way in the Bronx with his wife and two children. The accident occurred on 168th Street near 10th Avenue.
If Senator George McGovern is go ing to put forward a specific Vietnam peace plan, as Mrs. McGovern has promised, he will have the opportunity to draw a sharp distinction between himself and President Nixon on this issue.. And perhaps that is what Mr. McGovern needs to give himself some thing like “Presidential stature” and thereby to turn his campaign around. 
If you have wondered why the North Vietnamese can con tinue to fight on despite the biggest bombing campagin in the history of war, then ride with three American pilots and me down the roads south of Hanoi and find out. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 2—Maj. Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., who is Henry A. Kissinger's deputy, met with President Nguyen Van Thieu today for two and a half hours, according to United States Embassy sources, who did not disclose the substance of the meeting. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 2 (AP)—South Korea now has more troops in South Viet nam than the United States does, according to figures made public today by the United States command.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 2 (AP) —A bill to bar unauthorized visits by Americans to North Vietnam was rejected by the House of Representatives today amid charges that it would have permitted the President to block trips by journalists and families of prisoners‐of‐war. 
A two‐day strike of 170 bus drivers on four routes con netting New York City and 20 northern New Jersey points ended yesterday and service was resumed. The routes, over which 15,000 passengers ride each day, had been taken over last weekend from the Inter‐City Transporta tion Company by Transport of New Jersey. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 2—The Senate passed a $76‐billion de fense appropriations bill today after decisively rejecting a pro posal to cut off funds for fur ther bombing in Indochina. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 2 (AP)—Thirty‐six mortar shells were reported fired last night at the Ubon air base, one of the eight Thai airfields from which American planes strike at North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3 —A Federal district judge awarded $4,500 today to each of two persons he found had been falsely arrested during the May Day protests here last year. 
Republican Senators Jacob K. Javits of New York and Norris Cotton of New Hamp shire engaged in an angry confrontation last night on the floor of the Senate. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3 (UPI) —A House of Representatives subcommittee has criticized the Pentagon for not investigating possible war crimes by United States soldiers taking part in a program of political assassina tion in South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3—Pen tagon statistics showed today that bombs dropped by the United States in Southeast Asia in the first nine months of 1972 exceeded in tonnage the bombs dropped in all of 1971. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct. 4 (AP)—Thai based United States aircraft were reported yesterday to have flown air strikes aimed at heading off an enemy build‐up in Laos.
ALAMEDA, Calif., Oct. 3 (UPI) — The carrier Hancock returned today to her home port after a tour of duty off Vietnam. The Hancock, launched 28 years ago, will re main here for several months for repairs and retraining of her 3,000 crew members. 
FORT WAYNE, Ind., Oct. 3 — Vice President Agnew abandoned his restrained reci tations today for a snappy, off‐the‐cuff debate with youth ful hecklers. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3 — In a largely unnoticed lawsuit filed here more than three weeks ago, a manufacturer of cloud seeding equipment charges that the United States is making rain in Indochina with a device he invented, in violation of his patent rights. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3— American F‐111 tactical bomb ers were withheld from com bat missions for a few days, Pentagon sources said today, following the loss last Thurs day of one of the advanced planes during its first mission over North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct. 4 (Reuters)— Maj. Gen. Alexander M, Haig today held his second meeting with President Nguyen Van Thieu, an embassy spokesman reported. General Haig, who arrived Sunday, is deputy to Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national‐security ad viser. 
POUGHQUAG, N. Y.—On Nov. 7, I will vote for George McGovern for President, Sargent Shriver for Vice President and for the entire Demo cratic ticket, even though some well known Democrats, whose political ca reers have been made possible through their affiliation and membership in the Democratic party, have decided they'd rather switch than fight. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3 (AP) —Senator George McGovern will announce next Tuesday “a true plan” to end the Indochina war, Lawrence F. O'Brien, the Democratic Pres idential nominee's national campaign chairman, said to day. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Oct. 5 (AP) — The United States command has re portedly ordered an increase in the number of B‐52 bomb ing raids in the Saigon re gion. 
RAPID CITY, S. D., Oct. 4— Vice President Agnew brought the Republican campaign to Senator George McGovern's home state today and accused him of using smear and in nuendo as the basic tools in his Presidential pursuit. 
OSWEGO, N.Y., Oct. 4, (AP) — The school board here voted last night to deny the use of a school auditorium to a group that had invited the actress Jane Fonda and a radical activist, Tom Hayden, here for an antiwar meeting Oct. 14.
MONTGOMERY, Ala., Oct. 4 —Maj. Edward K. Elias of the Air Force, one of the three United States prisoners of war recently returned from North Vietnam, said today that he had 7a strong feeling” that prison er‐release negotiations “should be conducted from government to government and not between a diverse bunch of individuals.” 
NORWICH, Conn., Oct. 4— The Congressional race in eastern Connecticut pits a young, up‐and‐corning Repub lican incumbent who has helped dramatize the extent of inter national narcotics traffic into this country against a former Kennedy appointee who re signed from the Johnson Admin istration over its Vietnam war policy. 
A professor of government at Cornell University, just back from a trip to Hanoi, reported yesterday that he had met with seven captured American pilots and that all had told him they Were in good health. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Oct. 5 (AP) — The United States command has re portedly ordered an increase in the number of B‐52 bomb ing raids in the Saigon re gion. 
SPRINGFIELD, Ill., Oct. 4— Mrs. George McGovern said to day that, unlike President Nixon's younger daughter, Julie, she would not be willing to die for the Thieu regime in South Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 4—Maj. Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., deputy to Henry A. Kissin ger, met with President Nguyen Van Thieu and top members of his Cabinet for three hours and 40 minutes this morning.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 4 (AP)— The death toll from the turret explosion aboard the cruiser Newport News last week has risen to 20 with the death from injuries of a 21‐year‐old sailor, the Navy announced today. Seaman Apprentice Joseph Grisafi of Springfield, Va., died aboard the helicopter carrier New Orleans in the Pacific where he was being treated for his injuries, the Navy an nounced today. Seaman Ap prentice Joseph Grisafi of Springfield, Va., died aboard the helicopter carrier New Or leans in the Pacific where he was being treated for his in juries, the announcement said. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 4 (UPI) —American F‐111 fighter‐bom bers are flying combat missions again in Vietnam after being limited to noncombat flying for more than five days when one of the $15‐million planes was lost on its first such flight, the Pentagon said today.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5— President Nixon said today that he was trying to convince the North Vietnamese, presumably through Henry A. Kissinger's private talks, that it would be in Hanoi's best interests to reach a settlement of the war before the election, rather than wait for the possibility of a McGovern victory.
Following is the text of a foreign policy statement, en titled “A New International ism,” issued yesterday by Senator George McGovern and delivered, in part, before the City Club of Cleveland:
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5—Following is the official White House transcript of President Nixon's news conference here today:
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5— Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle, in a private letter to the Senate Armed Services Committee, de clared that representatives of his Seventh Air Force were specifically told in a meeting last December that the Joint Chiefs of Staff “would not question” the targets struck on Protective‐reaction missions. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5 — Following are excerpts from a letter from Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle to Senator John C. Stennis, chairman of the Sen ate Armed Services Commit tee, dated Sept. 26, 1972.
PARIS, Oct, 5 — Today's meeting of the Paris peace talks was described, as was last week's, as totally unpro ductive in the view of all four parties. It was the 162d meeting of the talks, which have now lasted for four years and five months.
CLEVELAND, Oct. 5—Sena tor George McGovern, contend ing that the war in Vietnam will “drag on for years” if President Nixon is re‐elected, proposed here today a foreign policy based on international idealism and domestic strength. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Oct. 6 (AP)—The United States command announced yesterday that the controversial F‐111 fighter‐bombers had been sent back into combat over North Vietnam after six days of tests. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Oct. 6 (AP)—The United States command announced yesterday that the controversial F‐111 fighter‐bombers had been sent back into combat over North Vietnam after six days of tests. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5— President Nixon said today that he was trying to convince the North Vietnamese, presumably through Henry A. Kissinger's private talks, that it would be in Hanoi's best interests to reach a settlement of the war before the election, rather than wait for the possibility of a McGovern victory. 
CLEVELAND, Oct. 5—Sena tor George McGovern, contend ing that the war in Vietnam will “drag on for years” if President Nixon is re‐elected, proposed here today a foreign policy based on international idealism and domestic strength. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 5 (AP)—Three Americans were killed in action in Indochina last week, the highest toll in five weeks, the United States command said today. Four Americans were reported wounded, and one was ‐listed as missing in action. Three others were said to have died of non‐combat causes. 
A ruling by a Federal District. Court judge In Wash ington should have a salutary effect on police officers who tyrannize innocent bystanders. Judge Gerhard A. Gesell has awarded civil damages to two men who were swept up in the wholly illegal dragnet which District of Columbia police used to counter the May Day disruptions of 1971. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 6—The Senate Armed Services Com mittee voted unanimously to day to confirm Gen. Creighton W. Abrams as Army Chief of Staff. It also voted to strip Lieut, Gem John D. Lavelle of another star for unauthorized bombing in North Vietnam.
Reports of a new Vietnam peace move touched off a light ning rally in stock prices yes terday, turning a losing session into a winner and sending glamour issues aloft. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 6—The Senate Armed Services Com mittee voted unanimously to day to confirm Gen. Creighton W. Abrams as Army Chief of Staff. It also voted to strip Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle of another star for unauthorized bombing in North Vietnam. 
In his first comprehensive foreign policy speech of the campaign, Senator George McGovern has emphatically rejected isolationism and summoned the nation to “new internationalism,” rooted in historic American ideals and fueled less by military might and a narrow nationalism than by economic strength and a willingness to share it with the less fortunate world. The speech Cleveland was clearly in reply to the Nixon campaign charges that Mr. McGovern's proposals for withdrawal from Vietnam, cutting American forces in Europe and slashing the defense budget portended a retreat to pre World War II isolationism. 
AGANA, Guam, Oct. 4 — The United States military build‐up in the Pacific, proceeding at the same time as the disman tling of the American machine in South Vietnam, has trans formed Andersen Air Force Base here into the biggest and busiest center for B‐52 opera tions over Indochina.
Bond prices leaped ahead again yesterday afternoon fol lowing news agency reports of a plan that was said to repre sent the latest allied proposals for ending the war in Vietnam. 
To the Editor:
CHICAGO, Oct. 6 — Senator George McGovern heightened his evangelistic tone against President Nixon today in ask ing black ministers here to join in a final voter‐registration drive that could be crucial for the different forces allied on the Cook County Democratic ticket. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 7—Newly infil trated enemy forces reportedly clashed with Government troops yesterday along Route 13 only 26 miles north of Sai gon in what may signal the beginning of a new phase in the six‐month‐old Communist offensive. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 6—Pro‐Government forces in South Vietnam's Senate were unable today to block the re election of the independent minded chairman, who strongly opposes President Nguyen Van Thieu's decree powers. 
After two years in self‐im posed exile in Europe, Luís Muñoz Marín, former Gov ernor of Puerto Rico, re turned to his homeland. He was whisked away from San Juan airport by leading mem bers of his Popular Demo cratic party to an undisclosed residence. There, he is ex pected to help his party pre pare a rally to recapture the governorship and legislative posts now held by the New Progressive party, which fa vors union with the United States for the island. Mr. Mufioz Marin, who is 74 years old, was once a champion of Puerto Rico's semiautono mous relationship with the United States.
New reports of movement in the Vietnam peace talks were denied by the United States and North Vietnam yesterday. Details on Page 6.
AGANA, Guam, Oct. 4—The United States military build‐up in the Pacific, proceeding at the same time as the disman tling of the American machine in South Vietnam, has trans formed Andersen, Air Force Base here into the biggest and busiest center for B‐52 opera tions over Indochina. 
New reports of movement in the Vietnam peace talks were denied by the United States and North Vietnam yesterday. Details on Page 6.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 7—Newly infil trated enemy forces reportedly clashed with Government troops yesterday along Route 13 only 20 miles north of Sai gon in what may signal the beginning of a new phase in the six‐month‐old Communist offensive.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 6—New reports of movement in the Vietnam peace talks originated today in London and Saigon, but they were quickly denied by both the United States and North Vietnam. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, Oct. 6 (AP)—A small band of Vietcong guerrillas reported ly attacked an isolated seaside leper colony and or phanage near here early today, blowing up houses, hospital wards and part of school. 
A collection of articles on heroin edited by two doctors who have worked for five years at the Haight‐Ashbury Free Clinic, treating over 3,000 ad dicts. Pieces on the history of heroin legislation, the pharma cology of heroin, drug use in Vietnam, various forms of treatment from methadone to therapeutic communities like Synanon. No easy answers emerge, of course, and the con tributors occasionally tend to politicalize the problem, but this is a good collection—it re flects advanced thinking about heroin and provides some his torical perspective.
Although they have publicly patched up their differences, supporters of Senator George McGovern and New York Democratic leaders appear to be long on unity talk but short on genuine cooperation in the Presidential campaign. 
WARREN, Mich., Oct. 7— Trustees of the Sergeant Sex ton Fund to aid prisoners of War have voted for, an inde pendent audit of the fund's books alter disclosure that the fund was $1,110.58 in, debt and had not spent any money to help prisoners. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 7—The United States Embassy has again protested a series of attacks on Senator George McGovern that were broadcast on South Viet nam's Government television and radio stations this week, an embassy spokesman says. 
WASHINGTON—The Senate Armed Services Committee cast ballots last Friday on the question of who was responsible for what in the Lavelle Affair, and the result—at least to the committee's critics—was predictable. On the basis of evidence accumu lated during months of investigation and weeks of hearings, the committee decided that Lieut. Gen. John D. La velle was solely responsible for order ing and covering up some 20 or more unauthorized bombing attacks on North Vietnam.
Hopes for peace in Vietnam sent stock prices soaring briefly on Friday afternoon, thereby providing a bright interlude for a market that spent most of last week gazing at the dark side of the moon. 
LOS ANGELES, Oct. 7 (UPI) —Anthony Russo Jr. was given court permission yesterday to leave for Copenhagen to attend a civilian inquiry into the Unit ed States “war crimes” in Indo china. He is scheduled to go On trial in a few weeks with Dan iel Ellsberg in the Pentagon papers case. 
To the Editor:
Senator McGovern may have failed to push the Viétnam issue onto center stage, but it still hovers in the wings of the campaign. Pres ident Nixon mentions it from time to time, usually to make the point that he is offering Hanoi everything short of American “surrender.” Mr. Nixon returned to this theme at his news conference last week, say ing that his talks with the North Vietnamese—presumably through Henry A. Kissinger's private trips to Paris—had reached a “sensitive” stage and that he was trying to persuade them that it would be unrealistic on their part to bank on the possibility of a McGovern vic tory. And Mr. McGovern, in a major address in Cleveland last week, called the Vietnam war the “central affliction” of American society— without, however, adding visibly to national alarm.
To the Editor:
In Washington last Sunday, Zubin Mehta (left) had trouble getting past plainclothesmen guarding Kennedy Center— though he insisted the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra would be handicapped without the presence of its conductor ... But in Tokyo, the 1972 Miss International beauty pageant did go on without Ronit Gafni, Miss Israel. Organizers of the contest apologized for withdrawing their invitation to Miss Gafni, but they said they were more concerned about pub lic security than hurt feelings. ... These were but two inci dents reflecting the continued concern, here and abroad, over the threat of Arab terrorism. On Sept. 5, the day 11 Israeli athletes fell victim to Arab guerrillas in Munich, Presi dent Nixon promised that “adequate security measures” would he taken to protect Israelis in the United States. Last week, Government sources indicated that the promise was being kept. A major effort is underway to identify possible terrorists among Arab residents and to intensify screening of travelers from Arab nations arriving in this country.
QUANGTRI, South Viet nam, Sept. 29 — What the South Vietnamese marines captured here more than two weeks ago was not Quangtri city, nor the Quangtri Citadel. It was an unrecognizable wasteland of smashed build ings and craters. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 7—“The issues,” political polls strongly suggest, are not at issue in the 1972 Presidential campaign. 
MANASSAS, Va., Oct. 7— Maj. Gen. Howard Harrison Cooksey, commander of the Army's First Regional Assist ance Command in Vietnam, and Mrs. Cooksey have an nounced the engagement of their daughter, Miss Allison Maitland Cooksey,. to Larry Thomas Hyland, son of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Hyland of Betterton, Md. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Oct. 8—Fighting spread in an area from only nine to 20 miles northof Saigon this weekend as Communist forces around the South Vietnamese capital pressed an apparently new phase in their six‐month old offensive. 
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, Oct. 7—A recent survey of opinion in Yugoslavia's Serbian republic suggests that histori cal bonds and sentiment are more durable and influential than the zigzags of politics and propaganda in shaping basic attitudes.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8—Mrs. Kay Worden is a Weston, Mass., housewife Who feels deeply about the Vietnam war. During the Republican convention she put a mildly‐phrased advertisement tin The Miami Herald asking people to write to President Nixon about the war. She also took a room in the Hotel Fontainebleau and said in the ad that she would be there to talk to anyone interested.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8— Henry A. Kissinger, the Presi dent's adviser on national secu rity, held another private meet ing in Paris today with North Vietnam's top negotiators. The White House said they would meet again tomorrow and left open the possibility of an un precedented third consecutive meeting on Tuesday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Oct. 9—Fighting be tween Government troops and Communist guerrillas continued yesterday as close as 10 miles north of Saigon, but South Viet namese failed to dislodge the guerrillas from three hamlets they have controlled all week end, military spokesmen said.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8 — Henry A. Kissinger, the Presi dent's adviser on national secu rity, held another private meet ing in Paris today with North Vietnam's top negotiators. The White House said they would meet again tomorrow and left open the possibility of an un precedented third consecutive meeting on Tuesday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 8—President Nguyen Van Thieu has again de nounced the Vietnamese Communists' peace proposal for a three‐segment coalition Government in the South.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Oct. 9—Fighting be tween Government troops and Communist guerrillas continued yesterday as close as 10 miles north of Saigon, but South Viet namese failed to dislodge the guerrillas from three hamlets they have controlled all week end, military spokesmen said.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8 (AP)— President Nixon thanked Amer ica's labor leaders tonight for their support of his Vietnam policy.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8—A senior military officer has testi fied in secret before a Senate panel that the Pentagon and the Administration do not “nec essarily” receive specific re ports detailing civilian damage and casualties resulting from United States air strikes in North Vietnam.
To the Editor: Maj. Gen. Edward G. Lansdale's recent Op‐Ed article, “After the War, Still Vietnam,” contains most of the familiar clichés and nonfacts of apol ogists for the war. Of particular inter est, however, is Mr. Lansdale's state ment that “the Politburo, of course, needn't resort to a bloodbath to weed out the opposition. As an alternative, it could stampede these people out of the country, just as the million refu gees fled from North Vietnam in 1954.” The language of the last sentence is masterful in its deceptiveness, suggest ing that it was the North Vietnamese who “stampeded” the refugees out.
The hearings by the Senate Armed Services Committee in the case of Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle have left the most important issues involved in the controversy in totally unsatisfactory suspension. The censure of the general, together with a virtually blanket clearing of all other persons and echelons, has all the earmarks of a coverup. Making one officer the scapegoat for more widespread wrongdoing would be an injustice in any case; if the intent is to wipe out the traces of a more serious deception, the matter would assume grave national importance.
To the Editor:
Moments after he had been mugged and robbed of $20 Saturday night, a veteran who had been wounded in Vietnam ran into a Bronx tenement after a gunman and was shot at twice before the man was captured.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 9 — White House officials cautioned today against drawing too many conclusions from the fact that Mr. Kissinger was meeting for a third day with North Viet namese representatives in Paris this week. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 10—Several hun dred Vietcong, guerrillas con tinued to hold on yesterday in at least three hamlets within 20 miles north of Saigon, Gov ernment military spokesmen said. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 9— Mrs. Eleanor McGovern asked Americans today to “change our leaders so we can change our policy” and thus “rescue our sons and retrieve our soul from the tragedy in, Southeast Asia.” 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 9—Five Navy pilots said in interviews today that their attack squad ron participated, under the guise of “protective reaction,” in at least three planned raids on a North Vietnamese airfield beginning last December. 
DETROIT, Oct. 9—The plan for peace in Vietnam that Sen ator George McGovern will un veil over national television to morrow night will enable Amer icans to “lift this terrible war from the conscience of a na tion,” he said here tonight.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 9 (UPI) — The Committee for the Re‐election of the Presi dent, anticipating Senator George McGovern's speech tomorrow night on Vietnam policy, issued today what it termed “a chronological look at McGovern's Vietnam rec ord.” 
Taking note of the barrage recently leveled at him by George McGovern, President Nixon at his news confer ence last week adroitly fired back without seeming to fire back:
PARIS, Oct. 9—Henry A. Kissinger and his deputy, Maj. Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., met privately with North Viet namese negotiators here for the second day today, and anoth er session was scheduled for tomorrow. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 9 (AP) — United States troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 700 men, to 35,200 last week, the United States command an nounced today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 10 (UPI)—The United States Ambassador, Ells worth Bunker, met privately for 45 minutes today with President Nguyen Van Thieu at the Presidential Palace. It was their third conference in a week. The topic of the meet ing was not announced, but political observers believed it dealt with the continuing peace negotiations in Paris.
Last week President Nixon said the secret Vietnam talks had reached a “sensitive” stage. Yesterday the White House announced that the current round of meet ings between Henry Kissinger and Hanoi's representa tives in Paris would go into an unprecedented third consecutive day today. One need not prejudge the out come to conclude that these are the most intensive— and potentially the most important—efforts to end the Vietnam war since substantial United States involvement began a decade ago.
KISSINGER: The Uses of Power. By David Landau, 270 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $5.95.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 10—Several hun dred Vietcong guerrillas con tinued to hold on yesterday in, at least three hamlets within 20 miles north of Saigon, Gov ernment military spokesmen said.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 9—Five Navy pilots said in interviews today that their attack squad ron participated, under the guise of “protective reaction,” in at least three planned raids on a North Vietnamese airfield beginning last December. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct. 11—A South Vietnamese military spokesman said yesterday that Government forces were making no direct effort to oust the small groups of Communist infiltrators still holding on in hamlets 20 miles north of Saigon. 
SITE 288, Laos, Oct. 5—Years ago, before the North Vietnam ese first shelled this village with their big guns, Yong Dua Mua was a great chief among the Meo people. He had rich rice fields on the high moun tains, pigs, chickens and a doz en water buffalo. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10 (AP) —Senator Harry F. Byrd Jr., releasing figures on the retire ment of generals and admirals, said today that it appeared there may be abuse of the sen ior officers' pension system. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10 — Henry A. Kissinger met in Paris with North Vietnamese repre sentatives today for the third day, and then instead of re turning to Washington as ex pected remained for a fourth successive meeting tomorrow.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10—The main objection to George McGovern's de tailed Vietnam peace plan is that it is too specific and too one‐sided. Pre sumably, he put it forward tin the hope of gaining support among the antiwar voters in this country, but he went so far in meeting Hanoi's war aims that he may actually have lost more sup port by his TV speech than he gained.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Oct. 10 (Agence France‐Presse) —Lepers armed with rocks and clubs have repulsed a Vietcong attack on their colony near here, a military source said to night.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10—The young pilot whose testimony was pivotal to the Navy's denial of unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam told a Senate committee, in testimony re leased today, that he had had a series of meetings with high ranking Pentagon officials be fore appearing before the com mittee. 
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
Senator George McGovern's address to the nation on the Vietnam war is a strong indictment of a politically bankrupt and morally ruinous policy. The Nixon Admin istration's failure to “win the peace” in Vietnam — four years after it was elected on a pledge to do so — and its continuance of the war up to this moment is one of the major issues of this campaign.
CHICAGO, Oct. 10—Senator George McGovern detailed to night his plans for withdrawal from Vietnam, including a visit to Hanoi by his Vice President to speed the return of American prisoners. 
OAKLAND, Calif. Oct. 10 (AP)—The wife of the first American pilot shot down in Vietnam and captured by the North Vietnamese is seeking a divorce, the family at torneys confirmed today.
SITE 288, Laos, Oct. 5—Years ago, before the North Vietnam ese first shelled this village with their big guns, Yong Dua Mua was a great chief among the Meo people. He had rich rice fields on the high moun tains, pigs, chickens and a doz en water buffalo.
LINCOLN, Neb. Oct. 10 (AP) — Capt. Eugene M. Ko touc, who was acquitted of charges stemming from the killing of South Vietnamese civilians at Mylai, said today that the Army was trying to dismiss him because it want ed to purge all persons as sociated with the 1968 inci dent.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10 — Henry A. Kissinger met in Paris with North Vietnamese repre sentatives today for the third day, and then instead of re turning to Washington as ex pected remained for a fourth successive meeting tomorrow. 
CHICAGO, Oct. 10—Senator George McGovern detailed to night his plans for withdrawal from Vietnam, including a visit to Hanoi by his Vice President to speed the return of American prisoners. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10— An antiwar amendment was dropped by Senate and House conferees as they reached agreement tonight on a com promise $74.3‐billion defense appropriations bill. 
MINNEAPOLIS, Oct. 10—The American Lutheran Church end ed its biennial convention here today after voicing its “deep concern” over what it called “a national retreat” from past commitmen ts to human values. 
News Analysis
The General Electric Com pany looks for sales this year to reach $10‐billion, Fred J. Borch, chairman and chief exe cutive officer, told 700 stock holders yesterday at an infor mation meeting in Denver.
Following is the transcript of Senator George McGov ern's taped television address last night on Vietnam: 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10—In an apparently conciliatory ges ture toward North Vietnam, a Defense Department official pledged today that released American prisoners of war would have nothing further to do with Vietnam combat ac tivities.
PARIS, Oct. 11—The French Government formally protested the bombing of its Hanoi diplo matic mission today.
The devastation of the French diplomatic mission Hanoi during an American air attack yesterday dramatizes the inherent contradictions of Administration policy the effort to settle the war in Indochina.
WASHINGTON, Oct 11— Henry A. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese representa tives in Paris held their fourth consecutive secret negotiating session today. The White House again refused to say whether they were making any progress.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 11 — Two members of the Senate Armed Services Committee called today for full‐scale hear ings into the. Indochina air war and alleged abuses in “protec tion reaction” raids over North Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 11—I witnessed the at tack that destroyed the French diplomatic residence.
MONTGOMERY, Ala., Oct. 11 —After a visit today from Vice President Agnew, Gov. George C. Wallace abruptly changed his mind about giving his bless ings to a Presidential candidate this year.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 11—The buildings of the French diplomatic mission to North Vietnam Were wrecked, today during an American bombing raid on the Hanoi area, and Pierre Susini, its chief diplomat, was seriously injured.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 11—As reports of damage to the French mission in Hanoi be gan to reach Saigon today, the American high command was swamped with inquiries. At first spokesmen would only confirm that United States planes had been operating over North Vietnam today.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 11— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird accused Senator George McGovern today of advocating a policy of “unconditional sur render” in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 11—The United States moved quickly today to express regret over the damage to the French Mis sion in Hanoi, but said the de struction might have been caused by a North Vietnamese antiaircraft missile and not by American bombs.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 11—“I was elected to smash the labor bosses.”—Representative Rich ard M. Nixon, quoted in an in terview on his first day in Con gress, Jan. 3, 1947.
COPENHAGEN, Denmark, Oct. 11 (Reuters)—A group called the International Commission of Inquiry Into United States War Crimes in Indochina be gan hearing witnesses today amid strong criticism from Op position politicians and the press.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 11—The United States moved quickly today to express regret over the damage to the French Mis sion in Hanoi, but said the de struction might have been caused by a North Vietnamese antiaircraft missile and not by American bombs.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 11—The buildings of the French diplomatic mission to North Vietnam were wrecked today during an American bombing raid on the Hanoi area, and Pierre Susini, its chief diplomat, Was seriously injured.
TANAN, South Vietnam, Oct. 11—South Vietnamese militia men recaptured this battered hamlet near Saigon today after a desultory week‐long battle, but other groups of enemy in filtrators were still said to be holding positions as close as eight miles to the capital.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 11— Henry A. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese representa tives in Paris held their fourth consecutive secret negotiating session today. The White House again refused to say whether they were making any progress.
SAIGON, Friday, Oct. 13 (AP) — An American military instructor was reported killed yesterday and another wounded when a South Vietnamese Army convoy was ambushed by Communist forces about 25 miles southeast of Saigon. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Oct. 13—South Vietnam ese troops fighting in the central coastal province of Quangngai reported yesterday that they had recaptured district capital that fell to the Communists a month ago. 
Judging by statistics extracted from the Pentagon by Senator Harry F. Byrd Jr. of Virginia the United States armed forces are being led by the lame and the halt. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 12‐‐President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that history had shown that “coalition with the Communists meant death.”
MINNEAPOLIS, Oct. 12—Sen ator George McGovern used the tape‐recorded voice of a young man, identifying himself as Vietnam veteran and choking with remorse, to tell an over flow crowd in the quadrangle of the University of Minnesota here today about American bombing in Indochina. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 12— Henry A. Kissinger returned to Washington tonight and re ported to President Nixon on his four days of private talks with North Vietnam's negotia tors in Paris. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 12— Henry A. Kissinger returned to Washington tonight and re ported to President Nixon on his four days of private talks with North Vietnam's negotia tors in Paris. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 12 (AP) — United States planes attacked North Vietnam again today, but new restric tions were reportedly imposed on raids in the vicinity of Hanoi after the heavy damage there to the French diplomatic mis sion yesterday.
The money and capital mar kets remained yesterday in the grip of malaise apparently cre ated by the lack of tangible support to rumors about im proved prospects for peace in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 12—The Senate voted 84 to 2 today to confirm the nomination of Gen. Creighton W. Abrams as Army Chief of Staff. 
SAIGON, Friday, Oct. 13 (UPI) — Communist troops overran the former United States Spe cial Forces camp at Benhet in the Central Highlands yesterday after virtually leveling it with more than 1,500 rockets and Motor and artillery shells, mili tary sources said today. tary sources said today.
COPENHAGEN, Denmark, Oct. 12 (AP)—Ramsey Clark, former United States Attorney Gen eral, said today that President Nixon was making American bombers “play God” for the people of North Vietnam, but he said the North Vietnamese would not be bombed into sub mission. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 12 (UPI)—The United States command said today that 21 Americans died in the Vietnam war last week, the highest number in a year. 
To the Editor: Seldom has the failure of a policy of our Government been so dramati cally obvious or as rigorously docu mented as Vietnamization. 
PARIS, Oct. 12 (Reuters) — Jean Saintény, France's dele gate‐general in North Vietnam from 1954 to 1958, said today that the secret negotiations be tween Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho started at his apartment here three years ago.
PARIS, Oct. 12 (AP)—Presi dent Nixon has sent a personal message to President Pompidou expressing regret for the dam age at the French general dele gation headquarters in Hanoi, the elysée Palace announced today.
ANDERSEN AIR FORCE BASE, Guam, Oct. 4—Six hours and 14 minutes after taking off from this Pacific island base, Capt. Terry Jennings' B‐52 shuddered and 32,500 pounds of high‐explosive bombs plum meted toward South Vietnam. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Oct. 12 (Reuters) — Laotian military sources said today that two North Vietnamese planes bombed and strafed a northern Laotian village three days ago, killing six persons and injuring two.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 12 (Agence France‐Presse)—An air‐raid alert here today report edly prevented the French Am bassador to Peking from arriv ing to take temporary charge of his country's diplomatic mission, which was wrecked yesterday during an American attack on the Hanoi area. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 13— The United States and North Vietnam today agreed in effect that numerous difficult prob lems remained to be settled be fore peace in Vietnam is possi ble.
NORFOLK, Va., Oct. 13 (AP) —The Vietnam peace plan of Senator George McGovern, the Democratic Presidential nomi nee, would not bring about a responsible withdrawal of troops or a responsible settle ment of the war, W. Averell Harriman, former chief United States negotiator at the Paris peace talks, said here last night. 
The destruction of the French dip lomatic mission in Hanoi was one of those rare events that illuminate our condition. If we Americans look, we can see what has become of us in the Vietnam war. We can see what sort of men lead us. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 14 — Heavy fighting was reported yester day in the jungles of the Cen tral Highlands with North Viet namese troops overrunning a ranger camp after two days of heavy artillery barrages. 
HONOLULU, Oct. 13 — The Pacific Fleet Command an nounced today that 46 persons, both black and white, were in jured in an “incident” aboard the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk Wednesday off North Vietnam.
To the Editor: It is understandable that relatives, friends, newsmen and others should want immediate release and contact with returned P.O.W.'s, but having spent four years in German P.O.W. camps myself, I am sure that the mili tary authorities are showing these men the greater kindness by return ing them to civilian life slowly. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 14 (Reuters)— South Vietnam is recalling its ambassadors from Washington, London and Paris for consul tations, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said today. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 13— The United States and North Vietnam today agreed in effect that numerous difficult prob lems remained to be settled be fore peace in Vietnam is possi ble. 
To the Editor: I would like to raise a few points in response to the Oct. 7 letter from Dr. Jerome Jaffe and Myles Ambrose. 
Dr. S. L Hayakawa, whose firm handling of campus dis orders in 1968 and 1969 brought him national promi nence, resigned as president of California State University at San Francisco. Dr. Haya kawa became acting head of San Francisco State in 1968 during campus disturbances and the next year became president. He said yesterday he had asked the university to appoint him president emeritus and that he would stay in his present post until a successor has been found possibly for several months. 
HONOLULU, Oct. 13—The Pacific Fleet Command an nounced today that 46 persons, both black and white, were in jured in an “incident” aboard the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk Wednesday off North Vietnam. 
HONG KONG, Saturday, Oct. 14 (Reuters)—The North Viet namese press agency reported today that two American war ships were shelled and set ablaze Thursday night by North Vietnamese shore batteries lo cated in Thanhhoa Province.
Nearly 2,000 participants in a day‐long “People's Fair to End the War in Indochina” walked up Madison Avenue yesterday led by the Van Troi Anti‐Imperialistic Brigade—a contingent of more than 50 Asian youths wearing red headbands.
WASHINGTON — No more than a dozen men here and in Hanoi know how far they may be from a deal to end the war in Vietnam — if, indeed, the negotiators and their superiors now know. After one of the more dramatic weeks of both diplomatic and political maneuver, the rest of us can only venture some educated guesses from the snippets of comment and evidence.
As George McGovern last week set forth his proposals for ending the Vietnam war, Henry Kissinger was conducting his latest series of secret talks with Communist representatives in Paris. Whether those talks have produced any loosening in the deadlock between the two sides is not known. What is known is the last public positions taken on the major issues by President Nixon, the Vietnamese Communists as represented by North Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong, and Senator McGovern. They are:
“Unfortunately, human beings tend to make errors in favor of themselves,” said Elmer H. Klinsman as he sat in his Newark office after taking over as the director of the Internal Revenue Service in the state. Mr. Klinsman, a 56‐year‐old, Plainfield‐born weekend golfer who has collected taxes in Manhattan, Boston, Syracuse and Brooklyn, said that for a while, he would just “look, listen and learn” in his new post. Then, said Mr. Klinsman, who lives in Summit, he will begin to implement his revenue philosophy: “To try our damnedest to let the average taxpayer know we are on the job getting after the people who aren't paying their taxes.”
Several years have passed since Presidents have dared to look voters in the face and proclaim the Vietnam war either a “fight for freedom” or an indispensable commitment to the defense of San Francisco. In this election year the principal argument for prolonging the American war in Indochina is that “we cannot abandon our friends.” Sir Robert Thompson, President Nixon's chief guerrilla war consultant, recently amended his prediction of the number of probable victims of deliberate Communist revenge in South Vietnam from “several hundreds of thousands” to “well over one million.” President Nixon has also matched his escalation of the air war over the last three years with escalating predictions of massacres to come if the U.S. fails to keep the Communists from taking power in Saigon. In the Orwellian age, the daily saturation bombings of Indochina are defended as missions of mercy.
ST. LOUIS, Oct. 14 (AP)—lofting the South Dakota Senator's long stand against the Vietnam war, The St. Louis Post‐Dispatch announced its endorsement today in its Sunday editions of the Democratic candidate. George McGovern, for President.
After the latest and longest round of high‐level peace talks in Paris, both North Vietnamese and American officials agreed last week that numerous difficult problems remained in the way of a settlement. That was self‐evident as President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam reaffirmed his rejection of any compromise, and as the United States Government continued to underwrite President Thieu's intransigence with a prolongation of the most intensive air assault in history.
GREENVILLE, Me., Oct. 14—Walking next to his father near a lake he fished as a boy, Navy Lieut. Markham Gartley looked up at the clear, blue sky and filled his lungs with crisp autumn air.
WASHINGTON — The two best‐known clerical figures in the Federal government are both Jesuits from the order's Province of New. England. But when it comes to their stands on the most explosive moral issues in politics right now—especially the war in Vietnam—the similarities stop.
WASHINGTON — The Senate approved Gen. Creighton W. Abrams as the Army's new Chief of Staff last Thursday by the margin of 84 to 2, but the tally had little to do with the real issue involved—the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON — With North Vietnamese infiltrators entrenched in the village of Binhnham, only eight miles north of Saigon, a squad of government militia commandered a Volkswagen bus to reconnoiter up the road. The soldiers were tired, they said, from a solid week of fighting, and they wanted to rest their legs. A few minutes later some shots rang out and two of the soldiers were dead.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 14 —The Nixon Administration has let it be known that it believes Henry A. Kissinger's latest negotiations with the North Vietnamese in Paris were more concerned with substantive issues and less with polemics than in any of the previous sessions.
TA KHLI AIR BASE, Thailand (AP)—Standing under the wing of an F‐111, Lieut. Col. Glen R. Ludy remarked, “Flying this airplane after anything else Is like driving a Cadillac after a Chevy.”
BOSTON, Oct. 14 (AP)—Jean Westwood, chairman of the National Democratic Committee, said here today that the Nixon, Administration had deliberately and incorrectly predicted a substantial increase in market demand for cotton, thereby producing a huge surplus and a sharp drop in prices.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Slipday, Oct. 15 (AP)—Sharp but scattered fighting was reported across South Vietnam yesterday and United States planes maintained the intensity of their bombing assault against the North.
ANN ARBOR, Mich., Oct. 14 —The University of Michigan has reinstated a chemistry professor who had been relieved of his teaching duties for showing an antiwar slide show to his organic chemistry classes.
To the Editor: The Sept. 6 Op‐Ed article by Nguyen Tien Hung which appeared alongside my own article and under the map made by me could be considered by your readers as an indirect refutation of my remarks and create doubts as to the validity of my testimony.
BELFAST, Northern Ireland, Oct. 15 (Reuters) — American Vietnam veterans have joined militant Protestants in the Ulster Defense Association, the paramilitary organization said today.
Enough of celebration: let us accept him as the best we have, and simply ask, whither Norman Mailer now? For Richard Poirier, in one of the best of the Viking Modern Masters series yet to appear, the process of defining Mailer's mastery is one of winnowing. Mailer's early works—“The Naked and the Dead,” “Barberry Shore,” “The Deer Park”—were “stylistically inadequate to his visions,” writes Mr. Poirier. The late works—“Of a Fire on the Moon” and “The Prisoner of Sex”—give “hints of exhaustion,” “evidence that Mailer's imagination of himself is becoming dangerously rigid and circumscribed, particularly when he indulges in rather simple and fashionable concerns about the future of the imagination in an age of science and technology.” And considering the work as a whole, Mr. Poirier is forced to admit. “It is … a chaotic mixture that awaits some larger redemptive effort; so that despite The Armies of the Night and Why Are We in Vietnam? Mailer now is like Melville without Moby Dick, George Eliot without Middlernarch, Mark Twain without Huckleberry Firm.” Paradoxically Mailer is a master without a masterpiece.
CHICAGO, Oct. 15 — Eight members of a group called “De Mau Mau” gang, which was formed by dishonorably discharged black veterans of Vietnam, where charged today with nine murders, including the mass slayings of two white families.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 15—The chief of South Vietnam's delegation to the Paris peace talks returned home this evening for consultations with President Nguyen Van Thieu on the latest efforts to end the war.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 15—The Nixon Administration has concluded in private that off‐target American bombs, and not a North Vietnamese antiaircraft missile, were probably responsible for the damage done to the French and other diplomatic missions in Hanoi last week, a high‐ranking official said today. And Secretary of State Willien P. Rogers, in a television interview, left the clear impression that he did not care to targue with reports of witnesses that a United States Navy F‐4 fighter‐bomber had dropped the bombs, although he said a “final determination” had not been reached.
CHICAGO, Oct. 15 — Eight members of a group called‐“De Mau Mau” gang, which was formed by dishonorably discharged black veterans of Vietnam, were charged today with nine murders, including the mass slayings of two white families.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16 Gen. Creighton W. Abrams was sent to South Vietnam today less than 12 hours after he was sworn in as Army Chief of Staff.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16—The Supreme Court declined today to hear a challenge to the Government's authority to invoke a trading‐with‐the‐enemy law to stop Communist propaganda from North Vietnam at the nation's borders.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16—President Nixon attacked today “the so‐called opinion leaders of this country” for not supporting him last May after he ordered the bombing of North Vietnam and the mining of its ports to deter the “specter of defeat.”
HONG KONG, Oct. 16 (Agence France‐Presse) — Le Duc Tho, North ‘Vietnam's adviser to the delegation at the Paris peace conference, received Soviet and Chinese assurances of support when he stopped in Moscow and Peking on his way to Hanoi, the North Vietnam News Agency reported tonight.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 116 (AP) — American troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 600 last week, to 34,600 men, the United States command announced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam—For the past few years everyone has talked about peace. In recent months more and more talk has been heard about peace, about one solution or another, about the coming cease‐fire and so forth.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 16— President Nguyen Van Thieu conferred with his ambassadors to the Paris peace talks and to the United States for eight hours today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 16—A British free‐lance journalist was ordered to leave South Vietnam today because he had written several articles critical of the South Vietnamese Government, Government spokesmen said.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 16 (Agence France‐Presse)—Pierre Susini, the French diplomatic mission chief who suffered serious injuries and burns in Wednesday's air attack on Hanoi, was scheduled to leave here today for Paris by way of Vientiane.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16—President Nixon attacked today “the so‐called opinion leaders of this country” for not supporting him last May after he ordered the bombing of North Vietnam and the mining of its ports to deter the “specter of defeat.”
HONOLULU, Oct. 16 (AP)—More than 100 men were involved in the racial fight in which 46 men were injured aboard the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk off Vietnam last week, the Navy said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 17 (AP)—Continued enemy attacks in the Saigon area, although small in scale, reportedly disrupted traffic yesterday on several of the major roads radiating from the capital.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16—The Supreme Court declined today to hear a challenge to the Government's authority to invoke a trading‐with‐the‐enemy law to stop Communist propaganda from North Vietnam at the nation's borders.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16 —Gen. Creighton W. Abrams was sent to South Vietnam today, less than 12 hours after he was sworn in as Army Chief of Staff.
To the Editor: The advice of Gem Mark W. Clark in a recent Op‐Ed article, “Turning on the Heat in Vietnam,” is most revealing because it illustrates the sick kind of thinking which got us into the war in the first place and is now being used to prolong the conflict and justify the terrible human suffering. The United States military has been echoing deceits for so long that now even generals have fallen for their own propaganda and continue to view the war in simplistic terms. General Clark announces that there are exactly four possible alternatives open to us, that the “Vietnamization” program has succeeded exceptionally well, that the solution to the problems of Vietnam can be found by intensifying the bombing and that the Vietnam war is really a conventional war just like the one we fought in Korea.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct. 18 (AP)—South Vietnamese military spokesmen reported yesterday that six villages in the Central Highlands had been seized by Communist troops in what appeared to be a “plant‐the‐flag” campaign.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17—Henry A. Kissinger was flying tonight from another meeting with the North Vietnamese in Paris to a meeting with the South Vietnamese in Saigon amid strong indications throughout the Government that negotiations for an Indochina ceasefire had reached a critical point.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17—Henry A. Kissinger was flying tonight from another meeting with the North Vietnamese in Paris to a meeting with the South Vietnamese in Saigon amid strong indications throughout the Government that negotiations for an Indochina ceasefire had reached a critical point.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 17—With North Vietnamese troops in the outskirts of Saigon and with the recent series of secret peace talks in Paris, President Nguyen Van Thieu has shown signs of increasing nervousness, ranking American and South Vietnamese officials say.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Oct. 17 (AP)—A South Vietnamese field commander was removed today for trafficking in opium. Friends said his army pay of S80 a month was not enough to support his wife and 12 children. Col. Nguyen Thanh Yen, deputy commander of Military Region I, was censured ordered into retirement and given three months’ leave with pay.
The shallowness of President Nixon's commitment to freedom of opinion, of speech and of press is divmatically illustrated by the extemporary talk he gave Monday to relatives of American prisoners of war in Vietnam. It is in fact the repeated evidence of the Administration's apparent willingness to erode the basic Constitutional guarantees of the First Amendment that forms one of the weightiest arguments against the President's re‐election.
PARIS, Oct. 17 (Agence France‐Presse) — Pierre Susini, the French Delegate General in Hanoi who was seriously burned in an air raid last week, arrived here today after a 23‐hour flight by way of Vientiane, Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct. 18 (Reuters) —Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the United States Army Chief of Staff, arrived here today for talks with South Vietnamese and American officials on the progress of the war.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia. Oct. 17 (AP) — North Vietnamese forces reportedly overran three Government garrisons off Route 5 today and brought their drive to shut down the vital rice road within 18 miles of tbe capital.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17—The Vietnam peace talks are now reaching the critical point where an “interim peace agreement”—not a final settlement—may be under serious discussion.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17 (AP); —The American Civil Liberties Union Foundation filed a $1,125,000 lawsuit today on behalf of a Massachusetts woman who contends her telephone calls were intercepted by Republican security forces at the party's national convention.
Interest rates displayed no clear trend yesterday as a large mass of financing moved through the underwriting processes and Presidential adviser Henry Kissinger's decision to go to Saigon was announced. Prices for corporate issues, aided by what were seen as revived prospects for peace in Vietnam, forged ahead to gains of as much as ⅜ point. Treasury securities crept to slim advances.
PARIS—The French role in seeking to accommodate and even facilitate peace in Indochina has been consistently invisible, discreet and sometimes effective. Neither this role nor its objectives are understood by many Americans.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17—Henry A. Kissinger's talks in Paris have raised not only hopes in Washington, but also many questions, for which there are some clear answers, and an even larger number of guesses, surmises and “I don't knows.”
To the Editor: Your editorial of Oct. 11 entitled “McGovern on Vietnam,” and James Reston's column entitled “McGovern's Peace Terms,” represent two irreconcilable views within The Times. It seems to me that one faction sees Senator George McGovern as a selfrighteous idealist who can do no wrong despite his fumbling, stumbling and rumbling all over the political spectrum. The other faction, led by Mr. Reston, sees him as a politically naive person who presumes by trusting in the Lord and our adversaries we can extricate ourselves from Vietnam without tarnishing our national leadership image in the world. It must have been a very tortuous decision‐making process for The Times to endorse the cause of George McGovern, but now that you are stuck with him you are looking sillier and sillier every day.
PARIS, Oct. 18—North Vietnam's delegation to the Vietnam peace talks said at a news conference here today that the “Nixon Administration's position remains erroneous and intransigent.”
CHICAGO, Oct. 18—Sargent Shriver, the Democratic Vice‐Presidential candidate, Is in town for a businessmen's breakfast tomorrow morning and the sponsors say it is already oversubscribed. Even though Mr. Shriver is well known in Chicago business and political circles, that may be one more indication that things are picking up for the McGovern‐Shriver ticket.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 18 (AP) —The Army said today that it was reviewing a decision to dismiss Capt. Eugene M. Kotouc, who was acquitted of charges that he maimed and murdered a prisoner at the time of the My Lai massacre.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Oct. 19 (AP)—The United States command reported yesterday that a second. F‐111 swingwing fighter‐bomber had been lost over North Vietnam, and it listed the two crewmen as missing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Oct. 19—Henry A. Kissinger and Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the new Army Chief of Staff, and four other American officials began intensive discussions with President Nguyen Van Thieu this morning in Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 18 (Agence France — Press) —The harshest penalty for violation of the press code was imposed yesterday on a Saigon publisher by a military court.
SEATTLE, Oct. 18 (AP) —Frank Markoe Sibley Jr., who said be commandered a United Air Lines jet Aug. 18 to protest the Vietnam war, was found guilty today of air piracy.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 18 (AP) —Senator John Stennis, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, formally asked the Pentagon today to explain its plans for follow‐up action in the wake of the panel's inquiry into unauthorized bombings of North Vietnam.
To the Editor: May I congratulate you on your lead editorial of Oct. 11 “McGovern and Vietnam.” While James Reston weakly laments the Vietnam alternatives which the two Presidential candidates present to us—Nixon's “endless and heartless” continuing of the war, and, echoing Administration propagandists, McGovern's “policy of surrender”—you courageously call for an affirmative national response to Senator McGovern's moving statement of the moral issue of the war.
PARIS, Oct. 18—North Vietnam's delegation to the Vietnam peace talks said at a news conference here today that the “Nixon Administration's position remains erroneous and intransigent.”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 18 (AP) —A Federal grand jury accused seven members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War and another man of conspiring to attack police officers and station houses with automatic weapons, fire bombs and other devices in Miami last August, the Justice Department announced today.
To the Editor: George McGovern promised, in the primaries, to run a campaign on the issues. And he did, setting forth clear positions on total Vietnam withdrawal, a $1,000 per person welfare program, amnesty for those who refused to fight in Vietnam, and greater individual freedoms (legalization of marijuana and abortion). Regretfully, however, as soon as he got the Presidential nomination, McGovern began changing these positions, equivocating and hedging on previously clear positions. Finally he gave up altogether campaigning on the issues (which had admittedly grown very blurred and amorphous), and has now turned to a straight‐out personal assault on Mr. Nixon. Using the most extreme and emotional rhetoric, McGovern is concentrating all his anger on the person of the President, rather than on his record. McGovern has descended from the issues to a low‐road campaign of false charge and smear. It is an unpleasant spectacle, and one that ultimately can only hurt McGovern.
CHOISY‐LE‐ROI, France. Oct. 18 (UPI)—Rene Joubaud, a retired factory worker, stood outside the front gate of his modest home at 13 Rue d'Arthe in this Paris suburb—he nodded toward the tightly shuttered house next door, No. 11, which is four blocks from the headquarters of the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace talks.
“If you have wondered what became of Austin J. Tobin following his retirement earlier this year as executive director of the Port of New York Authority, you might find it interesting that he has enrolled in the socalled Paunch Corps,” said Charles H. Brown, vice president of the International Executive Service Corps. Mr. Brown said in an interview that Mr. Tobin, who retired after heading the Port Authority for 30 years, had completed Paunch Corps assignments to advise the ports of Taiwan and Singapore on how to improve and develop.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 18—“We must consider the front still nearer than peace,” one senior Hanoi official said, apparently summing up the mood here at the moment.
WASHINGTON. Oct. 19 —The State Department said today that Philip C. Habib, the United States Ambassador to South Korea, had been summoned to Saigon to join Mr. Kissinger in his intensive talks with President Thieu.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Oct. 20 — North Vietnamese troops reoccupied yesterday at least two hamlets near Saigon from which they had been driven earlier in the week.
FORT ORD, Calif., Oct. 19—After a two‐week delay, the defense began its case today in the court‐martial of Pvt. Billy Dean Smith, the 24‐year‐old black draftee accused of killing two white officers in Vietnam.
Although the Senate voted 84 to 2 to confirm the appointment of Gen. Creighton W. Abrams as Army Chief of Staff, the former commander of United States forces in Vietnam has become a member of the Joint Chiefs under a cloud that shadows the entire Pentagon hierarchy.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Oct. 19 (AP)—Two Americans were reported to have been killed in the Vietnam war last week, five were missing and four were wounded, the United States command announced today. For the first time in seven years of weekly casualty reports, no American deaths from noncombat causes were listed.
It seems inevitable with a Presidential election that partisan debate over foreign policy should accelerate. In view of the record of the present Administration, debate must focus on Vietnam rather than other areas where successes are harder to challenge. This should not be unexpected, nor should we think it undesirable, as long as the debate is confined to the real issues and the usefulness and correctness of current policy. Unfortunately, however, there is a growing tendency for dissidents, ranging from the increasingly violent peace activists to the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, to feel compelled to lecture us on the morality of our policies.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 19—A former Central Intelligence Agency official said in a new book published today that the Air Force bombed a North Vietnamese leper colony in 1966 after Air Force photo analysts mistakenly concluded that the buildings—surrounded by two rows of barbed‐wire fence—were a North Vietnamese division headquarters.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 19—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, insisting that the documented instances of unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam did not represent a breakdown of civilian control of the military forces, outlined today a series of steps that he said were aimed at “further strengthening” civilian authority.
With a certain irony, Henry Kissinger's current talks with President Thieu in Saigon stand as the most delicate link in the chain of negotiations which appears to have brought the search for a Vietnam peace to a sensitive juncture. It has often been suggested that when the moment of truth for a Vietnam settlement arrives, it will be this country's nominal ally who proves even more intractable than the enemy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 19—President Nguyen Van Thieu, Henry A. Kissinger and Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker conferred twice today for a total of five hours.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 19—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, insisting that the documented instances of unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam did not represent a breakdown of civilian control of the military forces, outlined today a series of steps that he said were aimed at “further strengthening” civilian authority.
The legislative power is shared by the President, who initially proposes most legislation and vetoes or signs bills into law, and by Congress, which works its will through its committees and through conferences between its two chambers. Under such a system of shared powers, compromise is inevitable. When the Presidency and Congress are controlled by different political parties, compromise becomes crucial.
SAIGON. Friday. Nov. 20 (Agence France‐Presse) —The talks between Henry A. Kissinger and President Thieu are concerned with working out counterproposals to North Vietnamese and Vietcong proposals for a tripartite government in South Vietnam, acording to political sources here.
The President also met tonight with about 50 South Vietnamese legislators and other politicians, both pro‐Government and Opposition, at a dinner at the presidential palace following his second meeting with Ambassador Bunker and Mr. Kissinger.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 19—President Nguyen Van Thieu, Henry A. Kissinger and Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker conferred twice today for a total of five hours.
The closest thing to an official comment today came in the form of a news release issued by the Ministry of Information, which said:
A spokesman for the Russian Orthodox Church said the church would not reply to charges by the Soviet novelist Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn that there was a lack of religious freedom in the Soviet Union, The charge was made by Mr. Solzhenitsyn last spring in a letter to Pimen, who had just been installed as the Patriarch of Moscow and of all Russia—the highest post in the Russian Orthodox Church. At a news conference in Athens, where a delegation of Russian clergymen is meeting with their Greek counterparts, Metropolitan Juvenaly of Tula said the Solzhenitsyn complaint “contained many inaccuracies” that “led us to conclude that he does not know church life nor the spiritual life of the Orthodox Church.”
PARIS, Oct. 20—France's senior representative in North Vietnam, Pierre Susini, who died here last night from injuries suffered in the bombing of his mission nine days ago, was 52‐year‐old career diplomat.
SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 20 (UPI)—Organizers of this year's Veterans Day parade, dedicated to the Vietnam veteran, have lost a court fight to keep an organization of antiwar Vietnam veterans from marching in what is billed as the city's biggest Veterans Day parade in a decade. United States District Judge Stanley Wiegel issued an order yesterday to allow Vietnam Veterans Against the War to take part in Sunday's parade.
Another peace rally erupted yesterday on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, sending glamour stocks booming higher and ending a nervous market week on a hopeful note.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 20—Henry A. Kissinger and the United States Ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, conferred with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam for 3 hours and 40 minutes today.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 20—Former Treasury Secretary John B. Connally, now the chairman of Democrats for Nixon, used the example and words of President Kennedy and other Democratic Presidents tonight in a harsh and wide‐ranging attack on Senator George McGovern's candidacy, especially in the area of foreign policy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 21 (AP)—An increase in fighting was reported yesterday in the Saigon area.
An afternoon rally based on hopes of a Vietnam cease‐fire enabled prices in the counter market and on the American Stock Exchange yesterday to finish with good gains.
"You'll Like My Mother," the ads tell you, is a thriller—as if with a title like that you needed to be told—and it is a thriller of a fairly conventional, comfortably old-fashioned sort.Filmed in the dead of winter in a marvelous old mansion with cluttered firelit rooms, carved wood staircases, a secret attic hideaway, an ancient family Bible in the library, a coach house full of carriages and sleighs, it all but immerses you in castoffs from a rich and deeply rooted past that most of us can only dream of remembering. It also fails as a movie, but not dishonorably, and not without scoring some local successes along the way.The heroine is the young, very pregnant widow of a flier killed in Vietnam, who goes to visit her husband's mother, whom she has never seen, on a call of obligatory sympathy. She gets a lessthan-cordial reception from the mother, and discovers a miserable simple-minded teen-age sister-in-law she never knew existed. But it is only when, faced with a deepening blizzard, she is forced to spend the night and realizes with sleepy horror that someone has drugged her bedtime cocoa, that she is in present danger — and from more than just a hardhearted mother-in-law.The story that follows is full of holes and not too full of surprises, and it is all developed in a screenplay that might most charitably be described as awkward. There is a schematic simplicity to the plot that feels more like television than the movies.But there is also a visual density that is genuinely cinematic and that makes location shooting (in a real turn-of-the-century mansion in Minnesota) seem worthwhile. And the almost complete absence of false leads and tricky terror tactics suggests the kind of ground-level faith in situations and events that is the beginning of true morality in the movies.Along with its several virtues of omission, "You'll Like My Mother" shares in the respect for character and performance typical in Lamont Johnson's movies "(The McKenzie Break," "The Groundstar Conspiracy," etc.)—of which this is, in my experience, the worst. Patty Duke is expressive and surprisingly restrained as the young widow who must keep her wits about her. As her mother-in-law, Rosemary Murphy portrays a somewhat attractive villainess with an intelligent competence that is probably the best thing in the film.But I especially admired a new, rather lovely actress named—too perfectly—Sian Barbara Allen, who plays the simple-minded girl with more direct sympathy and less nonsense than you might expect in a movie the aim of which is to scare you."You'll Like My Mother" opened yesterday at several local theaters.
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich.—Calvin College in Grand Rapids is an institution of the Christian Reformed Church, an American offshoot of the Calvinist, intensely conservative Dutch Reformed Church. Its 3,000 students are mostly of Dutch descent.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 20—The Defense Department said today that it had concluded from an extensive investigation that it was an American bomb that “inadvertently struck” the French diplomatic mission in Hanoi Oct. 11.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 20—The White House is pressing the Pentagon on an urgent basis for answers to a series of questions on the military requirements for an effective cease‐fire in Indochina.
PARIS, Oct. 20 (Reuters)—Mr. Giuglaris's dispatch in France‐Soir said that in the first phase of the peace plan the United States would end its bombing and blockade of North Vietnam and the Nbrth Vietnamese would release, American prisoners of war.
PARIS, Oct. 20 (AP) — A French correspondent reported from Saigon today that he had learned from a usually wellinformed source” that elements of a cease‐fire throughout Indochina would be announced within 10 days.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 21—Henry A. Kissinger and the United States Ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, conferred with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam for 3 hours and 40 minutes yesterday.
CLEVELAND, Oct. 20 (UPI) —Sargent Shriver said today that the death last night of the French diplomat Pierre Susini, who had been injured in an American bombing raid on Hanoi, proved allegations that the United States conducted “indiscriminate” bombing in Vietnam.
SAIGON, Sunday, Oct. 22 (Reuters)—Communist gunners fired 56 122‐MM. Soviet‐designed rockets into the airbase at Bienhoa near Saigon just before dawn this morning, military spokesmen reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Oct. 22 — Henry A. Kissinger left Saigon for Cambodia this morning after a fourth day of talks with President Nguyen Van Thieu and other officials, well‐informed American officials said.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 21 — The highest authorities here believe that a settlement of the Vietnam war is more probable than not, but there is no conviction that agreement is definite.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 21—Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam, in an interview made public today, Said that his Government was now ready to accept a cease‐fire as the first step in a settlement of the Vietnam war.
Is a breakthrough to peace in Vietnam really imminent? There were two opposite schools of thought on that last week. What follows is the line of reasoning of each group.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 21 (Agence France‐Presse) —A combined Cambodian ‐ South Vietnamese force has recaptured Kirivong, in Takeo Province about 60 miles south of Pnompenh, the Government military spokesman said today.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 21—In the last days of the 92cl Congress, there was a significant struggle between President Nixon and the Democratic‐controlled Federal legislature, which produced a disturbing glimpse of the future beyond the election.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 21—Western diplomats said today that China was strongly opposed to any rorm of international supervision of a ceaseire in Indochina, including the assignment of observers.
PARIS—The Frenchman selling tickets to the Fete de l'Humanite was hesitant. An American, he said, perhaps would not feel comfortable at an event of the Communist party; while was primarily an occasion to drink, eat, play genies of chance and otherwise be amused, there would be political overtones. Not speeches, not speeches as such, but an awareness of world politics. “The Vietnam war, after all,” he said with a shrug.
To the Editor: For the first time since the Vietnam war began in 1962 the American people have a unique and historic opportunity to express a judgment on that war. This was not so in the elections of 1960, 1964 or 1968.
To the Editor: In all the pious editorials in The Times on Vietnam, a number of important issues remain unmentioned:
PONT‐SAINTE‐MAXENCE, France—The Vietnamese peace negotiations have now reached a crucial point and the immediate snag is in Saigon. One is reminded that both South and North Vietnam are fully aware that politics is a very important aspect of policymaking in the United States. This is excruciatingly true in the weeks before a Presidential election.
HONG KONG, Oct. 21 (Agence France‐Presse) — Shore batteries hit a United States warship and set it ablaze off Vinhlinh yesterday, the North Vietnamese press agency said today.
SAIGON—The first indication that something big was up came early last week with the announcement that Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the new Army Chief of Staff, was coming to Saigon. The general was friendly with President Thieu when he was American commander in Vietnam, and the knowledge that White House adviser Henry A. Kissinger had spent four days in Paris the previous week talking with the North Vietnamese about matters affecting Mr. Thieu's future invited speculation that General Abrams had something for the South Vietnamese leader's ears.
North Vietnamese diplomats in Peking told foreign envoys yesterday that a major development toward peace in Vietnam was possible in the next two or three days, according to a Reuters correspondent in the Chinese capital.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 21 (AP) —Fighting flared Saturday from the Central Highlands to the outskirts of Saigon today.
WASHINGTON—As we wearily emerge from the war in Vietnam, one might wish for the easy choice we had after World Wars I and II. But the obvious fact is that we cannot choose isolation. And we cannot choose simplistic policy like containment. We cannot even count on the rest of the world to pay as much attention to us as it has in the past.
Life magazine, in this week's issue, endorses the re‐elction of President Nixon, citing the Administration's “impressive record of accomplishments” in foreign policy.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 22 (UPI)—Thailand's head of government, Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn, said today that he had been told by a Kissinger aide there was a possibility of a settlement soon.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22—The head of the leading Vietnamese exile federation in Paris declared today that his group traditionally anti ‐ Communist, anti‐American and anti‐Thieuwas now willing to accept President Nguyen Van Thieu as participant in a coalition government in Saigon.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22—Indications mounted today that intensive negotiations were under way for a cease‐fire, to end not only the Vietnam war but also the fighting in neighboring Laos and Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Oct. 23—Henry A. Kissinger made preparations to leave Saigon today after another two‐hour meeting with President Nguyen Van Thieu this morning, a United States Embassy spokesman said. Mr. Kissinger's destination was not disclosed.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 22 (Agence France‐Presse)—A North Vietnamese inquiry into the United States bombing that destroyed part of the French mission and other foreign missions on Oct. 11 said today that the attack was deliberate.
An article in Saturday's New York Times, quoting former Treasury Secretary John B. Connally's attack on Senator George McGovern, gave the erroneous impression that there was no published evidence that Mr. McGovern had compared Ho Chi Minh to George Washington.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22—Indications mounted today that intensive negotiations were under way for a cease‐fire, to end not only the Vietnam war but also the fighting it neighboring Laos and Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22 —President Nixon, in his second nationwide radio speech of the weekend, built today on a Veterans Day theme to praise young Americans who have served in Vietnam and to detail his Administration's achhievements in their behalf.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 22—A high Government official said today that President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered his Government to start preparing detailed plans for a cease‐fire two weeks ago, and has told Cabinet officers that he and Henry A. Kissinger have been discussing intricate details of a proposal for a cease‐fire in place.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22 (AP)—Sources at two United States Air Force bases reported today that special alerts of air transport units, which they had said were possibly in preparation for the evacuation of American prisoners held by North Vietnam, had been canceled. The Pentagon, meanwhile, said that no “unusual action” had been taken with regard to the prisoners.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 15—Cambodia has passed her second anniversary as a republic and there is a general feeling here that even if the Vietnam war were to end quickly, Cambodia would be broken apart and dominated by forces beyond her control. There is also a feeling of resignation and a sense that resistance to inevitable historical forces is futile.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 22—A high Government official said today that President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered his Government to start preparing detailed plans for a cease‐fire two weeks ago, and has told Cabinet officers that he and Henry A. Kissinger have been discussing intricate details of a proposal for a cease‐fire in place.
HONOLULU, Oct. 22 (UPI) —The Navy announced today that 25 black men aboard the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk are charged with assault and rioting connected with racial disturbances Oct. 12 and 13 while the ship participated in air strikes against North Vietnam.
NAKHON PHANOM, Thailand, Oct. 22—The infiltration of North Vietnamese troops and war material through Laos and Cambodia into the western flank of South Vietnam appears to have dropped almost to the vanishing point, according to American pilots at this base adjoining the Ho Chi Minh trail.
Of all the myths generated in this election campaign, one of the most deceptive and groundless is the notion that Senator McGovern would try to lead the nation back Into isolationism—as if such a thing were possible in the world of jet travel, satellite communications, international commerce and ICBM's. Nothing in the McGovern campaign record conveys any sense that the United States should or could retreat from the position of world leadership which it has held during the greater part of three decades.
WASHINGTON—One of the highestranking American prisoners in North Vietnam is James Mulligan, a Navy captain who was shot down over Vinh on March 20, 1966. His wife, Louise, has waited for six and one‐half years now with astonishing strength, wisdom and even humor. As many Government officials have learned, she is a rare person so courageous and so straight that she makes one ashamed of one's own petty worries.
The Sunday Record, which is circulated in Bergen County and elsewhere in northern New Jersey, yesterday endorsed Senator George McGovern's Presidential candidacy because of what it called his “unwavering commitment” to end the bombing of Vietnam and withdraw all American forces from it.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 15—Cambodia has passed her second anniversary as a republic and there is a general feeling here that even if the Vietnam war were to end quickly, Cambodia would be broken apart and dominated by forces beyond her control. There is also a feeling of resignation and a sense that resistance to inevitable historical forces is futile.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Oct. 23 (AP)—The allied commands reported sustained United States bombing of North Vietnam and ground action in the South yesterday as top‐level diplomatic consultations continued on the subject of peace.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22 President Nixon, in his second nationwide radio speech of the weekend, built today on a Veterans Day theme to praise young Americans who have served in Vietnam and to detail his Administration's achievements in their behalf.
PARIS, Oct. 22 (Agence France‐Presse)— the Laotian Premier, Prince Souvanna Phouma, flew into Paris today on his way to the United States and said he was optimistic about the chances of peace in Laos and throughout Indochina.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22 (UPI) —Representative William S. Moorhead, Democrat of Pennsylvania, said today that secret government contingency plans would allow President Nixon to impose national censorship during a limited war such as the Vietnam conflict.
PARIS, Oct. 22—A group of non‐Communist exiles from South Vietnam met here tonight to agree on a list of men who might compose the neutralist third segment of a. Saigon coalition government.
PARIS, Oct. 23—The North Vietnamese delegation to the Vietnam talks here suggested today that if a peace agreement did riot come to fruition soon, it could mean that President Nixon has been mounting an elabdrate electoral charade.
Henry Kissinger has come home from Saigon amid thick rumors that a cease‐fire in Vietnam is near, to be followed by a political settlement of the war. This has prompted George McGovern to say that he, for one, weuld “rejoice” if the war could be ended, “no matter the political impact.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday. Oct. 24—Extensive fighting was reported yesterday in the center of South Vietnam, with Communist forces concentrating their attacks around the city of Pleiku.
The Columbia Broadcasting System reported last night that Mr. Kissinger and President Thieu were, in “complete agreement” in principle on a ceasefire plan, but that there were four areas of major difficulties.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 23—Henry Kissinger returned to the capital from Saigon tonight amid continuing speculation that a Vietnam or all‐Indochina cease‐fire was near, but with no firm agreement to end the war apparently reached. “We made some progress,” Mr. Kissinger said, but he refused to elaborate.
Four Newark veterans of the Vietnam war period, two marines, an infantryman and a Wave, told yesterday of the frustrations they had had getting jobs, schooling and medical care in a nation they thought they had served.
STANFORD, Calif.—Administration spokesmen have argued that the United States cannot unilaterally withdraw from Vietnam without inviting a vast bloodbath. In support of this thesis, they assert that following the Communist takeover in North Vietnam in 1954 a massacre occurred resulting in the killing of more than 50,000 people and the indirect deaths of hundreds of thousands more. Critics of the Administration have recently charged that no bloodbath took place in the North—that President Nixon's apparent concern is founded on a myth.
ITHACA, N.Y.—President Nixon now justifies continued United States military involvement in Vietnam in large part by portraying Vietnamese Communist leaders as bloodthirsty fanatics who would order a massive “bloodbath” against their former foes if they were to gain power in South Vietnam —one which would be even worse than the present daily bloodletting. In support of that argument, he has charged that the North Vietnamese Government carried out wholesale liquidations during the land reform from 1954 to 1956.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 24—There were signs yesterday that Henry A. Kissinger had achieved some success in his five‐day effort here toward a settlement of the Vietnam war, but evidently without having reached a conclusive agreement with President Nguyen Van Thieu.
PEKING, Oct. 23 (Agence France‐Presse) — Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the deposed head of state of Cambodia, said here today that Le Duc Tho had told him a week ago that “the most difficult and delicate” part of the Vietnam peace talks still remained to be held.
PEORIA, Ill., Oct. 23—Sargent Shriver, wearing a new silver prisoner‐of‐war bracelet on Veterans Day, charged the Nixon Administration today with suppressing job opportunities and educational benefits for G.I.'s—programs he said would have the highest priority in a new McGovern‐Shriver G.I. Bill.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 23 (Reuters)—United States troop strength in South Vietnam dropped by 600 men last week to 34,000, the United States command said today.
PARIS, Oct. 23 (UPI) — The Laotian Premier, Prince Souvanna Phouma, said today that he expected an Indochina ceasefire to be announced before the end of the month, but that full peace settlement would come later.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 23—There were signs today that Henry A. Kissinger had achieved some success in his five‐day effort here toward a settlement of the Vietnam war, but evidently without having reached a conclusive agreement with President Nguyen Van Thieu.
LONDON, Oct. 23 (Reuters)—Increased optimism over the possibility of an early end to the Vietnam war led to a big dollar‐buying wave in Europe today, raising value against the world's key non‐dollar currencies higher than at any time in seven months.
PEKING, Oct. 23 (Agence France‐Presse) — Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the deposed head of state of Cambodia, said here today that Le Duc Tho had told him a week ago that “the most difficult and delicate” part of the Vietnam peace talks still remained to be held.
ARLINGTON, Va., Oct. 23 (AP) — President Nixon, in a recorded message for Veterans Day ceremonies at Arlington National Cemetery, said today “Hope is strong for a full generation of peace as American troops return home from a distant conflict.”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 23—Henry Kissinger returned to the capital from Saigon tonight amid continuing speculation that a Vietnam or all‐Indochina cease‐fire was near, but with no firm agreement to end the war apparently reached. “We made some progress,” Mr. Kissinger said, but he refused to elaborate.
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 23—Senator George McGovern visited patients in the United States Naval Hospital here today to dramatize his Veterans Day pledge to provide jobs, education and health care for veterans of the Vietnam war.
BOHEMIA, L.I., Oct. 23 —President Nixon, telescoping virtually all of his New York metropolitan area campaigning into a single day's swing through Westchester County and Long Island, sounded familiar campaign themes and called for pluralities greater than those he received in the 1968 election.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 23—“Since Mr. Nixon has been President, rape is up 22 per cent,” an announcer observes in a matter‐of‐fact tone. “Since Mr. Nixon has been President, aggravated assault is up 25 per cent.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday. Oct. 24—Extensive fighting was reported yesterday in the center of South Vietnam, with Communist forces concentrating their attacks around the city of Pleiku.
TWIN FALLS, Idaho, Oct. 23 — After declining for several days to talk about the war, Vice President Agnew lashed out today at North Vietnam, accusing its Government of open aggression, in Southeast Asia.
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 23—Senator George McGovern visited patients in the United States Naval Hospital here today to dramatize his Veterans Day pledge to provide jobs, education and health care for veterans of the Vietnam war.
Bond prices bounded ahead yesterday amid mounting evidence of progress toward an end to the fighting in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 24—United States Army instructors are putting the entire South Vietnamese Army through a brief but intensive retraining program in a tacit acknowledgment that Vietnamization has not worked as American officials had hoped.
Trading over‐the‐counter and on the American Stock Exchange reflected yesterday disappointment over the reported reluctance of President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam to allow Communists to participate in a coalition government.
When he was young, President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam recalled one day last summer, he went to the underground to cooperate with the Communists in resisting the French. It was 1945.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct. 25—The curtailment of bombing is seen here as both a gesture of goodwill to the North Vietnamese and as a form of pressure on President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam.
MILWAUKEE, Oct. 24—Senator George McGovern accused President Nixon today of having needlessly prolonged the war in Vietnam to satisfy “right‐wing war hawks.”
President Thieu's grudging prediction that there may soon be a cease‐fire in Indochina reinforces speculation that Washington and Hanoi are close to agreement on terms for a cessation of hostilities. But the South Vietnamese leader has made clear that he will do all in his power to block a political settlement, again sharply rejecting any coalition with the Communists and setting conditions for a cease‐fire that may not be attainable.
PARIS, Oct. 24—Prince Souvanna Phouma, the Premier of Laos, said today that despite the hard‐line speech delivered by President Nguyen Van Thieu in Saigon, he remained optimistic about an Indochina ceasefire in the near future.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 24 (Reuters)—Following are excerpts from an unofficial translation of the address delivered by President Nguyen Van Thieu tonight on South Vietnamese radio and television:
MILWAUKEE, Oct. 24—Senator George McGovern accused President Nixon today of having needlessly prolonged the war in Vietnam to satisfy “right‐wing war hawks,”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24—The peace terms for Indochina that are now under such active discussion have been variously defined by Hanoi and Saigon, but Washington remains silent, as if it were a mediator rather than a party to the war. Indeed, mediation may be. Henry A. Kissinger's essential role at this point as he seeks a cease‐fire and exit for the United Slates, with or without a promising deal on the political future of South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24 (UPI) —President Nixon signed today legislation increasing GI Bill of Rights benefits to veterans of the Vietnam era and authorizing Federal aid to new state medical schools to operate in conjunction with the Veterans Administration. Some 200 veterans attended the White House ceremony.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24—The White House has ordered a temporary cessation of all bombing north of the 20th parallel in North Vietnam, Administration sources disclosed today.
BIG BOARD PRICES
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24—The White House combined some optimism with a dose of caution today in describing the results so far of Henry A. Kissinger's efforts in Paris and Saigon to achieve a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24 —The Air Force announced today the dismissal of court‐martial charges filed against Maj. Gen. John D. Lavelle by an Air Force lieutenant after what it called a “thorough investigation and review of all facts and material.” It said the charges had been dropped because “the interests of discipline” hal already been served.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24—The main point now in this sensitive phase of the Vietnam peace talks is to get as secure a cease‐fire as possible, guaranteed by the United States, the Soviet Union and China, and then a long pause to give time for really careful and private negotiations. It will not be easy but it is the first priority.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 24—United States Army instructors are putting the entire South Vietnamese Army through a brief but intensive retraining program in a tacit acknowledgment that Vietnamization has not worked as American officials had hoped.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 24—The White House has ordered a temporary cessation of all bombing north of the 20th parallel in North Vietnam, Administration sources disclosed today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 24 — President Nguyen Van Thieu said tonight that all the peace proposals discussed by Henry A. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese in Paris so far were unacceptable, and, in an ambiguous statement, he asserted that there were great difficulties in the way of cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 24 — President Nguyen Van Thieu said tonight that all the peace proposals discussed by Henry A. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese in Paris so far were unacceptable, and, in an ambiguous statement, he as serted that there were great difficulties in the way of a cease‐fire.
Reports that South Vietnam's President Nguyen Van Thieu would not accept a coalition government with Communists sent investors scurrying to the sidelines yesterday and a couple of key new bond issues thereby met a cool reception. The market opened broadly higher, continuing the peace‐oriented advance that began late last week, but the Thieu statement dampened enthusiasm and the gains were diminished.
PARIS, Oct. 24—The North Vietnamese spokesman here denounced President Nguyen Van Thieu's speech today as “new proof that he is obstinately opposed to peace and national concord, that he is extremely belligerent.”
After signing legislation to increase veterans’ educational benefits, President Nixon was greeting the veterans he had invited to the White House when one of them, Larry Kirk, caught the President's eye. Mr. Kirk, a 33‐year‐old veteran who lost both legs below the knees and part of one arm in combat in Vietnam, told the President he wanted to become a White House fellow. About 20 of the prestigious fellowships are awarded each May to persons who are then assigned to assist White House officials.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct, 25—An A‐6 Fighter‐Bomber crash‐landed on the deck of the United States aircraft carrier Midway off Vietnam last night killing four men and injuring 22 others, a spokesman for the Navy said today.
CHICAGO, Oct. 29—Sargent Shriver struck angrily today at “turncoat Democrats” and “liars” who he said were conducting a “smear campaign” against his Presidential running mate, Senator George McGovern.
Cease‐fire—A cease‐fire in place in South Vietnam. This would leave the Saigon Government, headed by President Thieu, in charge in most of the country, including main populated areas. The Vietcong, backed by 145,000 North Vietnamese troops who would remain in the country, would continue to control scattered areas. All American bombing and mining would stop and all American forces would be withdrawn, including advisers. There would be a prisoner exchange. Separate cease‐fires would be negotiated in Laos and Cambodia. Rules on American and North Vietnamese military aid to South Vietnam would be set. Mr. Thieu has called for withdrawal of North Vietnamese troops but is expected to yield on that.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Oct. 26 (UPI) — The Hanoi radio in an Englishlanguage broadcast heard here said:
To the Editor: It was saddening to an old admirer of James Reston to see him brand Senator McGovern's proposals for peace in Vietnam as “virtually a formula for surrender” [column Oct. 11].
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 25—American officials said today that the Communists ha& offered significant new concessions in the Vietnam peace negotiations because they were in a badly weakened military position.
HONG KONG, Thursday, Oct. 26—The Hanoi radio said today that the United States and North Vietnam agreed in Paris on a cease‐fire agreement to be signed in Hanoi and Paris this month, but that the United States backed off, “claiming that it was having difficulties in Saigon.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 25 — President Nguyen Van Thieu's vaguely worded rejection last night of a cease‐fire in place has left many political figures and diplomats here with the belief that he would still accept a cease‐fire soon, but only if Henry A. Kissinger can negotiate further concessions from the North Vietnamese.
ITHACA, N. Y. 6— When I left Hanoi on Sept. 30, high Governtnezit officials with whom I had been talking lacked any hope that the well‐publicized talks' with Henry Kissinger would be fruitful.
Despite enormous physical losses, South Vietnam appears to be recovering from its latest ordeal‐by‐fire potentially in better shape than before. Its armed forces, though bloodied, are leaner and tougher, having passed their first real combat test since.Vietnamization was accelerated in 1969. More importantly, there are clear signs Of an awakening self‐reliance—largely by necessity.
PARIS, Oct. 25 — A wide measure of understanding on a cease‐fire and a subsequent political settlement in Vietnam has been reached between Henry A. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese negotiator, Le Duc Tho, a high‐ranking French source disclosed here today.
A two‐hour program devoted to the prisoners of war in Vietnam, scheduled for this morning's “Today” show on the television network of the National Broadcasting Company, has been postponed.
AUGUSTA, Me., Oct. 25 (AP) —A resolution calling on. President Nixon “to halt immediately the massive bombings of North Vietnam” was passed yesterday at the sixth annual New England Conference of Priests Senate. The vote was not unanimous and several of the 55. Roman Catholic priests in attendance abstained from voting.
NEWARK, Oct. 25—Embittered Vietnam‐era veterans and some of their counselors indicted the nation's veterans services yesterday for what they said was a lack of commitment and an abundance of red tape.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 25 — President Nguyen Van Thieu's vaguely worded rejec tion last night of a cease‐fire in place has left many political figures and diplomats here with the belief that he would still accept a cease‐fire soon, but only if Henry A. Kissinger can negotiate further concessions from the North Vietnamese.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 26 — Enemy troops launched 113 small‐scale attacks thorughout South Vietnam in the last 24 hours, Saigon Government spokesman said this morning, in what American officers termed an apparent campaign to broaden claims to territory in the event of a cease‐fire.
LONDON, Oct. 25 (Reuters) —Melvin R. Laird, United States Secretary of Defense, flew to London tonight and parried all questions about the progress of current Vietnam peace developments.
Cease‐fire—A cease‐fire in place in South Vietnam. This would leave the Saigon Government, headed by President Thieu, in charge in most of the country, including main populated areas. The Vietcong, backed by 145,000 North Vietnamese troops who would remain in the country, would continue to control scattered areas. All American bombing and mining would stop and all American forces would be withdrawn, including advisers. There would be a prisoner exchange. Separate cease‐fires would be negotiated in Laos and Cambodia. Rules on American and North Vietnamese military aid to South Vietnam would be set. Mr. Thieu has called for withdrawal of North Vietnamese troops but is expected to yield on that.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 25—America officials now believe that there will be a cease‐fire in Indochina in the next few weeks, perhaps even before election day, Nov. 7, barring a supreme act of folly in Saigon or Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 25 —Senator Harold E. Hughes said in a statement today that the Air Force decision to dismiss all remaining charges against Maj. Gen. John D. Lavelle was “in effect, a slap on the wrist for flagrant violations of orders.”
PARIS, Oct. 25 — A wide measure of understanding on a cease‐fire and a subsequent political settlement in Vietnam has been reached between Henry A. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese negotiator, Le Duc Tho, a high‐ranking French source disclosed here today.
Herbert G. Klein, President Nixon's director of communications, said yesterday he did not expect a cease‐fire in Vietnam before the Nov. 7 election.
The stock market drifted aimlessly yesterday as investors awaited further developments in the negotiations for a truce in Vietnam.
To the Editor: President Nixon's hard line against legal relief for war objectors—expressed at the Oct. 16 meeting of the League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia is distressing. It also shows remarkable inconsistency.
To the Editor: One of the more excruciating problems of the Vietnam war is the relationship between our P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s on the one hand and those who have refused induction and gone to jail or emigrated on the other. Often ignored in our thinking about this are those who supported the war and yet used the loopholes to avoid service. Their number is far greater than either those who served or those who refused. What are we to make of these “fortunate” people? And with so many of these hypocrites in our midst, how can we so passionately condemn those honest few who refused to fight and yet accepted the consequences of their acts?
TOKYO, Oct. 26 (AP)—Following is the text of a statement issued by the North Vietnamese Government today on the peace negotiations, as broadcast in English and monitored here:
Reports of approaching peace in Vietnam had little influence on the commodity futures markets yesterday. Traders were very much aware of the news, and it might have encouraged some buying, but only where there were underlying factors for strength.
ASHLAND, Ky., Oct. 26—President Nixon said tonight he was confident that difficulties blocking a Vietnam ceasefire and peace settlement “can and will be worked out.”
Sept. 26 and 27—For the 18th time since August, 1969, Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, meets privately in Paris with Le Duc Tho, a Hanoi Politburo member, and Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's chief delegate to the Paris peace talks.
We have now heard from both Vietnams and it is obvious that the war that has been raging for 10 years is drawing to a conclusion, that this is a traumatic experience for all of the participants.
Public confirmation by Henry A. Kissinger, the President's national security adviser, of significant progress in the negotiations for peace in Vietnam produced a dramatic but shortlived rally in the stock market yesterday.
John Kerry of Massachusetts is one of three Vietnam veterans who are major‐party nominees for seats in the House of Representatives this year, according to researchers at Congressional Quarterly, the Washington‐based publication.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26—Henry A. Kissinger said today that “peace is at hand” in Indochina and that a final agreement on a cease‐fire and political arrangement could be reached in one more negotiating session with the North Vietnamese “lasting not more than three or four days.”
IOWA CITY, Oct. 26—Senator George McGovern expressed hope here today that the, Nixon Administration's confidence of an imminent cease‐fire in the Vietnam war was well founded. But he refused, in a carefully worded speech Id 15,000 people on the campus of the University of Iowa, to credit the Nixon Administration for the prospect of peace, saying that those who had opposed the war deserved “much of the credit.”
PARIS—Historians may eventually decide the most significant aspect of the Indochina war was that it never produced a superpower confrontation resembling the nuclear showdown over Cuba just ten years ago.
ASHLAND, Ky., Oct 26 —president Nixon said tonight he was confident that difficulties blocking a Vietnam ceasefire and peace settlement “can and will be worked out.”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26—Henry A. Kissinger said today that “peace is at hand” in Indochina and that a final agreement on a cease‐fire and political arrangement could be reached in one more negotiating session with the North Vietnamese “lasting not more than three or four days.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Oct. 27—The South Vietnamese Foreign Ministry issued a statement this morning that said South Vietnam was “ready to accept a cease‐fire” but “would never accept a political settlement which goes against the interests and aspirations of the 17 million South Vietnamese people.”
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Oct. 26 — Prince Souvanna Phouma, Premier of Laos, said today that no cease‐fire had been worked out yet for Cambodia or Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam; Oct. 26 (Reuters)—The United States command reported today that there were no American combat deaths, in Indochina last week.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26—How did happen? And what remains to be settled before a cease‐fire in Vietnam? These are the questions now being discussed here at the end of the long dark tunnel.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26 —Pentagon sources said today that the Defense Department was considering a significant acceleration of arms shipments to South Vietnam to insure that most of the jets, tanks and artillery previously scheduled for delivery arrive before any cease‐fire closes off reinforcement.
PARIS, Oct. 26—North Vietnamese and Vietcong delegates here demanded today that the United States observe what they said was a firm agreement to sign a Vietnam cease‐fire accord in Paris next Tuesday, Oct. 31.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Oct. 27 (AP)—The South Vietnamese command reported that Communist‐led forces stepped up their attacks across South Vietnam yesterday and today in what allied officials said was an accelerated effort to establish their presence before a cease‐fire.
IOWA CITY., Oct. 26—Senetor George McGovern exptessed hope here today that the, Nixon Administration's confidence of an imminent cease‐fire in the Vietnam war was well founded. But he refused, in a carefully worded speech to 15,000 people on the campus of the University of Iowa, to credit the Nixon Administration for the prospect of peace, saying that those who had opposed the war deserved “much of the credit.”
COLUMBIA, S. C., Oct. 26—Sargent Shriver introduced himself here today as the grandson of a Confederate officer from Maryland and said that an end of “fat, waste and bureaucracy” in the Pentagon and withdrawal from Vietnam are the steps to restoring the military traditions of Southerners like Wade Hampton, Robert E. Lee and George C. Marshall.
SAIGON, Friday, Oct. 27 (Reuters)—The United States command reported yesterday that, to meet the increased Communist activity in South Vietnam, B‐52 bombers had been sent on 27 missions to attack suspected concentrations of troops and their supply dumps.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26—Official declarations that a peace settlement is now within President Nixon's reach brought joy today to his political strategists, who have spent a trying 10 days defending themselves against charges of political espionage and searching for a fresh burst of good news.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26 —Pentagon sources said today that the Defense Department was considering a significant acceleration of arms shipments to South Vietnam to insure that most of the jets, tanks and artillery previously scheduled for delivery arrive ‘before any cease‐fire closes off reinforcement.
Second District: This slice of eastern Connecticut has a chance to send a distinguished man to Congress in the person of Roger Hilsman (Dem.). An Assistant Secretary of State under President Kennedy, Mr. Hilsman resigned over the Vietnam war policy of the Johnson Administration. He faces tough opposition from Representative Robert Steele (Rep.), who has been a reasonably good Congressman with a flair for publicity. Our preference is for Mr. Hilsman.
PARIS, Oct. 26 (AP)—Following, as made public in English, is the text of the statement delivered at the Paris peace talks today by the South Vietnamese delegate, Nguyen Xuan Phong:
Bond prices staged a brief rally early yesterday on reports of a Vietnam peace agreement between the United States and North Vietnam, but the market failed to hold much of its phis.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Oct. 27—The South Vietnamese Foreign Ministry issued a statement this morning that said South Vietnam is “ready to accept a cease‐fire” but “would never accept a political settlement which goes against the interests and aspirations of the 17 million South Vietnamese people.”
Henry A. Kissinger's firm assurance that “peace at hand” in Vietnam and his confirmation of the agreement announced by North Vietnam should go far to relieve doubts about the Administration's determination to end the long United States involvement in Indochina. Nevertheless, an apparent delay in the signing of the pact and Saigon's resistance to provisions that require South Vietnamese cooperation indicate that peace remains elusive.
The formula that Henry A. Kissinger says may be bringing peace in Vietnam nearer is basically the same outline for peace he envisioned in an article he wrote almost four years ago.
WASHINGTON—I share certain of the criticisms you and others have raised concerning the Nixon Administration dealing with the war in Vietnam. Yet I can support Richard Nixon for the Presidency despite the fact that I disagree with him on how to extricate us from the quagmire in Vietnam.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 27 (Agence France‐Presse)—High Thai officials here today welcomed the Indochina peace agreement that Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser, said was “at hand.”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26—At a time of suspicions, fear and resentment on the path to truce In Vietnam, the White House today pronounced a veiled threat to Saigon and an unmistakable commitment to Hanoi that seal the bargain even before it is signed.
In the inevitable television race to cover yesterday's briefing by Henry A. Kissinger, national security adviser to President Nixon, the Columbia Broadcasting System came in first with the help of an electronic partner called the “mini‐cam.”
HONG KONG, Oct. 26 (Agence France ‐ Presse)—Premier Chou En‐lai said in Peking this evening that China supported North Vietnam's position in the present stage of the peace negotiations with the United States.
To the Editor: The views concerning the position of Jews in the Presidential election expressed by two former students of mine (Op‐Ed Oct. 9) depressed me deeply by the absence of any reference to the war in Vietnam, by the highly exaggerated claim of “pressure the Israelis have put on U.S. Jewry,” and above all, by the lack of any reference to the fundamental commitments that characterize Jewishness.
Buoyed somewhat by reports that a Vietnam peace settlement is near prices on the American Stock Exchange and in the over‐the‐counter market registered gains in stepped‐up trading yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26 (UPI) — Gen. Alexander M. Haig, deputy to Henry A. Kissinger, said today that he met Friday with Paul Warnke, Senator George McGovern's representative, on the peace talks.
Letters to the Editor
LONDON, Oct. 27—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said todar that the limits on military aid to South Vietnam under the proposed peace settlement would permit shipment of sufficient weapons to keep the Saigon Government militarily strong.
North Vietnam has put the Nixon Administration in a difficult position with its insistence that before the end of the month the United States sign the agreement that has been made public by Hanoi and essentially confirmed by Washington.
MOSCOW, Oct. 27 — Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin expressed hope today that further Vietnam negotiations would be held and that they would “soon lead to an agreement ending the war.”
Prices on the American Stock Exchange and the over‐thecounter market finished slightly lower yesterday as the trading pace slowed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 27 — President Nguyen Van Thieu insisted today that his “minimum demand” before accepting a cease‐fire was the total withdrawal of all North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 27—High Administration officials said today that, despite North Vietnam's latest statements in Paris, they remained confident that an Indochina agreement would be concluded in a matter of weeks.
Wall Street sat back yesterday and waited for signs of further progress toward peace in Vietnam, but none came and the stock market slid lower.
HONG KONG, Saturday, Oct. 28—The Vietcong pledged in a radio broadcast monitored here today to “absolutely respect and carry out all provisions” of the reported peace agreement worked out by United States and North Vietnamese negotiators in secret talks in Paris.
BONN, Oct. 27 —Economics Minister Helmut Schmidt said today that peace in Vietnam “could lead to a downright reversal” of the dollar flow on international money markets toward the direction of the United States next year.
LOS ANGELES, Oct. 27 —President Nixon warned in January that he would “pull the rug out” from under any opponent who might seek to make an issue of the Vietnam war. But the talk in the campaign of Senator George McGovern here today was that by waiting until the last days before the election to proclaim that peace Was in sight, Mr. Nixon may have pulled the carpet from beneath him self. It is an unconventional attitude, but the McGovern candidacy is unconventional.
LOS ANGELES, Oct. 27 — In a strange election, this must have been the strangest moment: George McGovern about to leave Detroit for his day of campaigning, and suddenly the accompanying press hears that Henry Kissinger is talking on television about peace in Vietnam. Everyone piles out of the buses to watch in the cocktail lounge of a Howard Johnson's motel.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 27 — President Nguyen Van Thieu insisted today that his “minimum demand” before accepting a cease‐fire was the total withdrawal of all North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam.
PARIS, Oct. 27—North Vietnam's spokesman in Paris said today that the points of agreement reached by Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho in Paris went far beyond those issued by the Hanoi Government yesterday. He termed Hanoi's lengthy statement merely a summary.
SALT LAKE CITY, Oct. 27 (AP)—Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield Democrat of Montana, said today that he takes Henry A. Kissinger, the President's national ‐ security adviser, “at his word” that peace and not politics is the main concern of the Administration in the current negotiations for peace in Vietnam.
TOKYO, Oct. 27—Well before any cease‐fire announcement, North Vietnam is carefully preparing its future relationship with the United States: unqualified friendship for the American people and uncompromising condemnation of the United States Administration.
PARIS, Oct. 27—North Vietnam's spokesman in Paris said today that the points of agreement reached by Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho in Paris went far beyond those issued by the Hanoi Government yesterday. He termed Hanoi's lengthy statement merely a summary.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 27—High Administration officials said today that, despite North Vietnam's latest statements in Saris, they remained confident that an Indochina agreement would be concluded in a matter of weeks.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 27 —1 Foreign diplomats with contacts in Hanoi suggested today that North Vietnam decided four weeks ago to accept a ceasefire because of a belief that a settlement would more effectively advance the Communist cause than would a continuation of fighting.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 28 (AP)—South Vietnamese field commanders were reported yesterday to be carrying out operations aimed at rooting out Vietcong agents from villages and hamlets.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 27 (AP) —Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, today challenged Democratic assertions that the Nixon Administration could have made peace in Vietnam four year ago.
DANBURY, Conn.—I write this from a Federal correctional institution under relaxed provisions whereby Federal prisoners can comment on contemporary topics. My mail can now be sent sealed and uncensored. It is my first piece formally written for publication in 37 months of imprisonment.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 28 — A high Administration official said today that even if North Vietnam agreed to President Nixon's request for an additional negotiating session between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho in Paris, the United States would not sign the settlement until it had again consulted with South Vietnam.
HOMESTEAD, Fla., Oct. 28 — A daughter was born last Monday to Capt. Carl P. Parlatore, who served three tours of duty with the Air Force as a fighter pilot in Vietnam, and Mrs. Parlatore at the Homestead Air Force Base Hospital. The child has been named Christine Michele.
In trading major concessions to achieve their nine‐point accord, North Vietnam and the United States have each attained important national goals: the Nixon Administration has found the formula, if not yet the reality, ending the Vietnam fighting and arranging a total United States pullout from an ill‐fated conflict a decade after we entered it. Hanoi has obtained the chance acquire the legitimacy and political stature in South Vietnam that it has sought for more than two decades. Both sides have reason for satisfaction in their achievement; the United States for at least short‐term consideration, North Vietnam for the long‐term potential. Such balance is no small accomplishment and remaining ambiguities should not overshadow what has been achieved, as even Soviet Premier Kosygin acknowledged in urging North Vietnamese and Vietcong envoys to continue negotiations with Dr. Kissinger.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 28—Saigon and most of the tropical countryside around it have suddenly broken out in the red and yellow of thousands of South Vietnamese flags the Government has ordered displayed under threat of arrest.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 28—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Vietnam said today that acceptance of the proposal for a settlement of the war made public by North Vietnam and the United States would amount to a “surrender” for his country and was therefore “unacceptable.”
SAIGON, Oct. 28 (Reuters)—The Vietcong leadership announced in a radio broadcast today that it had ordered its troops to observe a cease‐fire if the draft agreement between North Vietnam and the United States is signed on Tuesday, as Hanoi has insisted that it should be.
To THE EDITOR: Professor Mark in The Week in Review Oct. 22 questions the reasoning that led a number of academics to support the re‐election of President Nixon in an advertisement in The New York Times. I should like to answer for myself.
SPOKANE, Wash., Oct. 28—Senator George McGovern called upon the United States today to make the United Nations once more “the first stop on the road to crisis, rather than a last resort.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, Oct. 28—Pathet Lao and North Vietnamese forces were reported on the attack in many parts of Laos today, taking a number of towns and large amounts of territory.
“If ever there was a case for, the other side, it was the Vietnam war,” Senator Jacob K. Javits told a rain‐spattered crowd in Co‐Op City yesterday. “And now that's gone, too.”
VANCOUVER, Wash., Oct. 28 (UM) — Six antiwar protesters were arrested today after trying unsuccessfully to block freight train they thought might he loaded with ammunition hound for Southeast Asia. The six were part of a group of 30 who staged a “people's blockage” protest along the Burlington‐Northern Railroad itcks.
LOS ANGELES, Oct. 28 (AP) —Senator George McGovern contends that he will win the Presidential election despite the pollsters’ odds against him, but he adds that if he loses he could not “in good conscience” ask the American people to rally behind a victorious President Nixon.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 28 — In this country, where most of the seven million people are believers in mystical signs and spirits, there has been a spate of omens this month. These manifestations, unfortunately, are the only things that have given any hope to the disillusioned Khmer people that peace might return to them after two and a half years of a hopeless war that they did not want or seek.
Dr. Henry Kissinger's confident assertion that “peace is at hand” in Indochina is the most welcome statement from a public official or from any Administration since the resolution of the Cuban missile crisis. At long last, after so many illusory lights at the end of the tunnel, and beyond the natural sense of relief that this announcement did not bring news of invasion, bombing, mining or deadlock, Dr. Kissinger managed to be convincing that the longest war in our history is about over.
Cardinal Cooke asked all Roman Catholics yesterday to join in prayers for peace in Southeast Asia. Specifically, he requested that the pastors of the 408 churcnes In the Archdiocese of New York lead their congregations in special prayer today.
HONG KONG, Oct. 28 (Agencel France‐Presse) — A group of American women arrived in Hanoi today for a visit at the invitation of the Vietnam Committee for Solidarity with the American People and the Vietnam Women's Union, the North Vietnamese press agency reported. The visitors included Jane Hart, wife of Senator Philip A. Hart, Democrat of Michigan, and the poets Denise Leverlov and Muriel Ruykcyscr.
‘Twas two months before Christmas, and all through Peru last week the creatures of the Ministry of Education were stirring. They had a message for Santa Claus: Get lost. The Peruvian GOVernment has taken a hard line against “foreign” ‘themes general, and Santa, Christmas frees and reindeer particular. Radio and television advertisers will be sticking to “completely Peruvian” symbols, such as the national version of the Christ ‘Child, “El Nino Manuelito.” A Government aide added that Santa and company were fine for, northern climes, but: “We don't have reindeer or snow‐covered pine trees at Christmas time. We're in the middle of summer.”
PARIS—The approach of Indochina peace brings with it inevitable discard of shibboleths that have dominated political thinking on Asia during the past two decades. Two assumptions that now seem wholly outmoded are the so‐called domino theory, Washington's bask precept of the nineteensixties, and the so‐called Brezhnev Doctrine tentatively presented as a fundament of Moscow's Eastern policy.
WASHINGTON—Outlining the prospective peace settlement to reporters last Thursday, Henry Kissinger alluded to the danger of extensive bloodletting if both sides make a lastditch effort to expand the areas under their control as the cease‐fire goes into effect. Actually, many Washington analysts predict that a standstill cease‐fire will produce not an end to hostilities but a change in the character of the war. The shift they foresee is from set‐piece battles between major units of the North and. South Vietnamese armies to a shadow war between small units of guerrillas and counterguerrillas, terrorists and police, assassination teams and psychological‐warfare squads on both sides, all vying for control of the countryside.
Jerome J. Brown could easily be mistaken for typical American businessman living abroad. He's 30 years old, slightly beefy, profane and constantly wears oversized sunglasses. He's now a partner in a management consulting firm headquartered in Malaysia, where he lives with his Indonesian wife and their young son.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Oct. 29—Communist troops occupied 13 hamlets and cut three major highways within 40 miles of Saigon yesterday in an apparent lastminute effort to seize territory before an expected cease‐fire, allied military officers reported.
PARIS, Oct. 28—The Soviet Ambassador to France, Pyotr A. Abrasimov, a member of the Soviet Communist Party's Central Committee, spent an hour with the French Foreign Minister, Maurice Schumann, today discussing the Vietnam situation.
TORONTO, Oct. 28—If any explanation is needed as to why the Vietnam war is drawing to a close, the devastated but still dynamic port city of Haiphong provides it.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 28—for the next few days or weeks, President Nixon is obviously going to have trouble getting the South Vietnamese and the North Vietnamese to agree to his terms for a cease‐fire. For the now, lie seems to be caught in the middle, but actually lie holds most of the trump cards to get through the election and arrange a truce. The outlook for an enduring peace, however, is not so good.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 28—Sexton is depressed about the Vietnam war ending. He is only forty years old and, therefore, cannot remember what it was like to live in a world without a Vietnam war. He has doubts about his ability to survive in such a world.
WASHINGTON—Excitement was in the air. Hanoi had just broadcast the secret terms of a United States‐North Vietnam peace agreement, claiming that Washington was stalling on putting it into effect. The Administration, which had said almost nothing for a month about the peace talks, was forced td respond. By the time of the daily 11 A.M. White House news conference last Thursday, some 500 newsmen were crammed into the briefing room.
SAIGON—Some 1,000 of President Thieu's supporters marched on the Presidential Palace here last Friday. Mr. Thieu, who had arranged the audience, spoke to them of the tentative peace agreements reached between Washington and Hanoi. “Any cease‐fire without our signature will not be valid,” he said, to applause, “[and] so far we have not agreed to anything.”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 29—The North Vietnamese diplomats in Paris say that both sides made concessions in arriving at the current proposed settlement of the war.
WASHINGTON, Oct, 29 (AP) —A panel of national security advisers to Senator George McGovern called today for sweeping reform of the armed services, saying the military is “one of our greatest casualties of the Indochina war.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam,) Oct. 29—Government policemen have been combing the streets and neighborhoods of Saigon and other large cities for the last two weeks, checking identification cards and enforcing new regulations that South Vietnamese citizens must possess a national flag and produce it on demand.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 29 —Administration officials said without qualification today that the Indochina peace accord would not be signed by Tuesday, the deadline set by North Vietnam, but at the same time, they continued to express optimism about an early settlement of remaining details. Moreover, Vice President Agnew, appearing in a television interview, sought to assure North Vietnam that the United States was not seeking to renege on the nine‐point agreement reached by Henry A. Kissinger and Le Due Tho in Paris earlier this month.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Oct. 30—Communist troops intensified their infiltration 0 campaign around Saigon again yesterday in preparation for an expected cease‐fire occupying 17 hamlets within a 45‐mile radius of the capital, allied officers said.
ROME, Oct. 29—Pope Paul VI today expressed hope that the expected cease‐fire in Indochina would represent a “true peace” that would satisfy the present “eagerness for peace that pervades the world.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Oct. 30—Communist troops intensified their infiltration campaign around Saigon again yesterday in preparation for an expected cease‐fire, occupying 17 hamlets within a 45‐mile radius of the capital, allied officers said.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 29—The United States could experience another depression if President Nixon were to win a second term in the White House, Senator George McGovern suggested here today.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 29 Administration officials said without qualification today that the Indochina peace accord would not be signed by Tuesday, the deadline set by North Vietnam, but at the same time they continued to express optimism about an early settlement of remaining details.
“Peace in Vietnam—it will do wonders for the stock market.” That is what some of the smart people in Wall Street have been saying off and on for several years.
HONG KONG, Monday, Oct. 30 (Agence FrancePresse)—Peking today threw its weight behind Hanoi and demanded that the United States sign a Vietnam peace agreement as scheduled.
To the Editor: Former Treasury Secretary John B. Connally, in a recent television speech, repeated Vice President Spiro Agnew's observation that the flow of Vietnamese refugees to Saigon rather than to Hanoi is an ideological reflection. The observation is warped. If B‐52's were dumping their bombs over Saigon instead of Hanoi, the refugees would be northward bound. Survival is still the name of the game.
LOS ANGELES—The White House announcement that peace is at hand in Vietnam should by all ordinary logic have destroyed whatever hopes George McGovern had in this election, So most commentators thought—and so evidently did some of the McGovern staff.
MOSCOW, Oct. 29 (Reuters) —Pravda today dismissed the idea that South Vietnam's president, Nguyen Van Thieu, could block a Vietnam peace settlement and appealed to Washington not to let the chance of ending the war slip by.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 29 (UPI)—Longbinh, the 15,000‐acre United States Army camp that once was the largest American military installation outside the continental United States, will be turned over to the Vietnamese Government by Dec. 1, military spokesmen announced today.
PEKING, Oct. 30 (AP)—China advised Britain today that she was ready to consider taking part in an international peace conference on Vietnam but could decide only when full details were known.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 30 (AP) —In a paid political broadcast on radio tonight, Vice President Agnew criticized Senator George McGovern's statement that if elected he would reserve the right to renegotiate some portions of any Vietnam peace agreement.
HONG KONG, Oct. 30—China today supported North Vietnam's demand that the United States sign the cease‐fire agreement worked out in Paris and strongly condemned President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, Tuesday, Oct. 31 (AP) — United States naval bombardment of the North Vietnamese coast north of the 20th parallel has been halted in a further move to improve the climate for cease‐fire negotiations, informed sources said yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 30 (AP) — The United States cOMmand announced today that American troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 300 men last week, to 33,700. All those Withdrawn were from the Army. The present target is 27,000 by Dec. 1.
PARIS, Oct. 30—After a few frantic days, it is now clear that there will be no Vietnam peace ceremony here tomorrow—and perhaps none before the United States election a week from tomorrow.
MOSCOW, Oct. 30—With peace in Vietnam seemingly within grasp, there is an element of anachronism in Moscow's latest stage hit, “Under the Skin of the Statue of Liberty,” which portrays United States war protesters pitted against helmeted police. Full houses are viewing it, at the avant‐garde Taganka Theater.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 31 — A South Vietnamese border camp in the Central Highlands was lost Sunday night to a heavy Communist shelling and infantry attack, the Saigon command said yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct., 30—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Vietnam emphasized again today that North Vietnam must agree to withdraw all of its troops from the South and recognize the demilitarized zone before his country will sign a peace accord.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 30—Administration officials said today that they remained confident that North Vietnam would not allow the passing of its deadline tomorrow for the signing of the Vietnam accord to set back the chances to reach a settlement within the next few weeks.
PARIS, Oct. 30—A prominent South Vietnamese neutralist said today that the published version of the agreement to end the Vietnam conflict failed to provide sufficient guarantees of political democracy.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 30—Administration officials said today that they remained confident that North Vietnam would not allow the passing of its deadllne tomorrow for the signing of the Vietnam accord to set back the chances to reach a settlement within the next few weeks.
A half‐hour political telecast turned down by two networks was aired last night on the Columbia Broadcasting System network.
Regardless of details for a temporary or quasi‐permanent accommodation in South Vietnam, the innate pluralism of that nation must be cons sidered. The fractionated nature of its diverse interest groups requires establishment of a complex, even burdensome system of governing if any imaginable peace is to be more than a farce. Unitary government simply will never work. Some format for federalism is requisite for anything approximating political equilibrium.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 30 (AP) —The Rev. Daniel J. Berrigan, the antiwar priest, was denied permission by the United States Parole Board today to go to North Vietnam.
Tuesday Oct. 31 (Reuters)—Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh of North Vietnam warned last night that if the United States continued to delay signing the draft accord to end the war, it would never reach an agtieernent.
Bond prices edged lower on a broad front yesterday, apparently reflecting a general letdown now that an end to the Vietnam fighting appears at hand.
Prices on the American Stock
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Oct. 31 — A South Vietnamese border camp in the Central Highlands was lost Sunday night to a heavy Communist shelling and infantry attack, the Saigon command said yesterday.
HONG KONG, Tuesday, Oct. 31 (Reuters)—The Hanoi radio said today that an American pilot whose plane was shot down in North Vietnem on Sunday was killed during an air‐raid by other American planes soon after he was captured.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Oct. 30 (UPI) —North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces captured the town of Kengkok, a military camp and a hill position in southern Laos, during the weekend, military sources said today. Refugees reported that three American missionaries and a Canadian were captured by the Communist forces.
An injunction against a committee seeking to impeach President Nixon was overturned here yesterday by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.

PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 31—Authoritative Western military sources reported today that large numbers of North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops were moving out of their Cambodia border base areas into South Vietnam—apparently as part of a Communist attempt to seize control of as much South Vietnamese territory as possible before a cease‐fire is declared.
Under the provisions of the nine‐point draft agreement between North Vietnam and the United States, the following would occur upon signing:
In Paris, diplomatic sources reported that Hanoi and Washington had agreed on an international truce‐supervisory commission consisting of Canada, Indonesia, Poland and Hungary and on a peace conference to follow within 30 days of the signing, with Secretary General Waldheim of the United Nations participating.

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—The United States is seeking reassurances from Hanoi that, once the Indochina settlement takes effect, North Vietnam will withdraw many of the 35,000 troops it now has stationed in the northern part of South Vietnam, even though it is not required to do so under the. terms of the agreement as: worked out.
PNOMPENH, Oct. 31 (AP)—Vietnamese Communist troops in Cambodia have received orders to continue fighting against the Government despite any cease‐fire reached in Indochina, a high military intelligence source said today:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 31 (AP)—President Nguyen Van Thieu granted 637 convicts amnesty today on National Day, the official Government news agency Vietnam Press announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 1—President Nguyen Van Thieu today deInounced the draft peace agree‐, ment that was to have been (signed yesterday as “a surrender of the South Vietnamese people to the Communists.”
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—United States military intelligence officials said today that North Vietnam began a “heavy movement” of war materials into South Vietnam about 10 days ago in an apparent effort to build up its forces in preparation for a cease‐fire.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, Wednesday, Nov. 1 (AP)—Enemy forces reportedly, struck at more than 100 Government positions yesterday throughout South Vietnam for the sixth consecutive day. struck at more than 100 Government positions yesterday throughout South Vietnam for the sixth consecutive day.
BERKELEY, Calif.—If only it were true that, as Henry Kissinger says, peace is at hand, if only there were some sign that the Vietnam war will soon pass into history, a bitter yet faded memory. Along with the Vietnamese, our country badly wants an end of the war, so that we grasp at the nearest rumor, seize on the slightest pretext to believe a settlement is in reach. The imminence of peace is a message that Henry Kissinger has repeatedly conveyed, in varying forms and intensities, since early 1969, and this time around it was accepted with an eagerness that surpassed even the usual unblinking credulity.

PARIS, Oct. 31—An international commission to supervise a Vietnamese cease‐fire has been agreed upon by the United States and North Vietnam; according to diplomatic sources here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 1 — Enemy troops reportedly continued to attack strongly in the Central Highlands yesterday, overrunning the second Government position there in two days. Meanwhile, American B‐52 bombers flew heavy raids over the southern part of North Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 31 (Agence France‐Presse) —Official sources remained silent, today on the possibility of a new meeting between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Due Tho, but optimistic observers saw hope in an official omission yesterday of any reference to the deadline of today for signing a cease‐fire accord.
WASHINGTON—"An act of healing rather than a source of new division.” This, Henry Kissinger said last week, was the Nixon objective in the ceasefire negotiations. But the agreement promises more recrimination, disillusion and bloodshed.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31—The United States is seeking reassurances from Hanoi that, once the Indochina settlement takes effect, North Vietnam will withdraw many of the 35,000 troops it now has stationed in the northern part of South Vietnam, even though it is not required to do so under the terms of the agreement as worked out.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 1—President Nguyen Van Thieu today denounced the draft peace agreement that was to have been signed yesterday as “a surrender of the South Vietnamese people to the Communists.”
To the Editor:

In Paris, diplomatic sources reported that Hanoi and Washington had agreed on an international truce‐supervisory commission consisting of Canada, Indonesia, Poland and Hungary and on a peace conference to follow within 30 days of the signing, with Secretary General Waldheim of the United Nations participating.
Despair is hardly justified that peace did not come to Vietnam precisely on Oct. 31, the day Hanoi's spokesmen heralded as their proposed cease‐fire date. Despite his spectacular assertion just one week ago, that “peace is at hand,” Dr. Kissinger never publicly committed himself to such an early conclusion to last month's secret negotiations.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 1 (UPI) —Senator Harold Hughes said today that the Senate Armed Services Committee should renew its investigation of illegal air raids over North Vietnam unless the Pentagon conducts a thorough inquiry.
PARIS, Nov. 1—American sources in close touch with the Vietcong's delegation in Paris said today that the Vietcong were irritated and unhappy with North Vietnam for having dropped three of its crucial demands in reaching a cease‐fire agreement with the United States.
CHICAGO, Nov. 1 (AP)—Two antiwar activists, David Dellinger and Tom Hayden, were given permission by a judge today to go to Hanoi’ after they said they had a request from the North Vietnamese regarding the possible release of additional United States prisoners of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 1—Duong Van Minh, the retired general who is the principal rallying point of the opposition to President Nguyen Van Thieu, declared today that he disagreed with the cease‐fire plan drafted by the United States and North Vietnam.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 1—Military sources reported today that Laotian Govenment troops had retaken two important towns but that one of them was more than half destroyed when withdrawing North Vietnamese set fire to it.

VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 1—There is an apparent lack of reliable knowledge these days about the current state of Communist traffic on the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and this underscores one of the thorniest problems negotiators will face in future efforts to bring peace to Indochina.
TOKYO, Nov. 1 — Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ohira today told a special envoy from South Vietnam, Pham Dang Lam, that Japan would contribute heavily to the postwar economic reconstruction of Indochina.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Nov. 1 (UPI)—Secretary General Waldheim declined today to comment on a report that he would participate in a Vietnam conference 30 days after they signing of a truce.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 1—Foreign Minister Long Boret of Cambodia said today that he was optimistic about the future of his country after receiving a detailed briefing from Secretary of State William P. Rogers on the current diplomatic efforts to settle the Indochina conflict.
Bond prices surged on broad front yesterday, apparently drawing renewed inspiration from progress toward peace in Vietnam and from a belief that the financing demands of industry and Government would be manageable in the months ahead.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 2—The United States resumed heavy B‐52 attacks on Communist targets in North Vietnam and South Vietnam overnight after having diverted many missions to North Vietnamese‐base areas in Laos and Cambodia yesterday, the American command reported this morning.
PARIS, Nov. 1—American sources in close touch with the Vietcong's delegation in Paris said today that the Vietcong were irritated, and unhappy with North Vietnam for having dropped three of its crucial demands in reaching a cease‐fire agreement with the United States.
PEKING, Nov. 1—Premier Chou En‐lai said today that the United States must bear some ,of the responsibility for the passing of yesterday's deadline for the signing of a Vietnam peace agreement.
FORT ORD, Calif., Nov. 1—In nearly four hours of testimony, Pvt. Billy Dean Smith repeatedly denied today any involvement in the murders of two Army officers in Vietnam.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 1—Duong Van Minh, the retired general who is the principal rallying point of the opposition to President Nguyen Van Thieu, declared today that he disagreed with the cease‐fire plan drafted by the United States and North Vietnam.
Stock prices rose sharply yesterday, propelled mainly by the latest peace rally on Wall Street.
Senator George McGovern told thousands of people in the garment center yesterday that the Nixon Administration had made “undercover deals” with big business but had “done nothing” for more than five million unemployed Americans.
PEKING, Nov. 1 (AP)—Premier Chou En‐lai told a group of British newsmen today that President Thieu had objected to seven of nine points in an agreement drafted by Americans and North Vietnamese. Mr. Chou quoted the South Vietnamese President as saying that if he did not put his own signature to that agreement, “There will be no peace.”
HANOI, North Vietnam, Nov. 1 (Agence France‐Presse)—Well‐informed sources said today that the North Vietnamese Government would not be opposed to a further meeting between its special negotiator, Le Duc Tho, and Henry A. Kissinger.
The two things that have preoccupied President Nixon most of his waking hours for the last two years have been winning the war in Vietnam and winning re‐election to the Presidency. Both have been hard, ambiguous and agonizing problems, but the contrast between his handling of the war and his direction of the election campaign is startling.
SAIGON, Friday, Nov. 3 (UPI)—The United States command reported yesterday that American jet fighter‐bombers flew more than 140 strikes over North Vietnam on Wednesday.
A late rally yesterday pushed the stock market, as measured by the Dow‐Jones industrials, to within an eyelash of its 1972 high as trading volume continued heavy. Drugs, motors and brokerage‐house issues scored. gains.
PARIS, Nov. 2—The four delegations to the Paris talks on Vietnam engaged in recriminations today that reflected strains in both the American and Communist alliances as well as the continuing dispute over the cease‐fire draft agreement between the United States and North Vietnam.
PARIS—A curious footnote to the wind‐down of the Indochina war is revival of hopes among political leaders exiled from that area of finding new opportunities to play roles in its development.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 2 — The United States has so speeded up the delivery of arms, helicopters and planes to South Vietnam in advance of a possible cease‐fire that today the South Vietnamese Air Force got planes it was not prepared for—four‐engine C‐1 130 transports.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 2 (Reuters)—South Vietnamese combat deaths dropped last week, although a 15 per cent increase was reported in fighting.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 2—President Nixon asserted tonight that the draft agreement for an Indochina settlement would not be signed until all remaining issues were resolved.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 2—Administration officials disclosed today that the United States had decided to provide the South Vietnamese Air Force with hundreds of additional jet fighters, transports and helicopters above previously programed levels.

FORT ORD, Calif., Nov 2 (UPI)—The defense rested its case today in the court‐martial of a young black soldier accused of killing two lieutenants at an Army base in Vietnam. The prosecution immediately called the first of several rebuttal witnesses to bolster its case against Private Billy Smith, 24‐year‐old, charged with setting a boobytrap that killed two officers at Bien Hoa Army Base on March 15, 1971.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 2—“I'm not even here,” Henry A. Kissinger said as he eased his way out of the South Vietnamese Embassy reception last night. “That was my double.”
CINCINNATI, Nov. 2—Senator George McGovern, his voice hoarse and cracking, campaigned doggedly through three states today in an effort to close the apparent gap between himself and President Nixon in the final days ‘of the Presidential race.
OTTAWA, Nov. 2—External Affairs Minister Mitchell Sharp today offered the services of Canada's 19‐member delegation now in Vietnam to any international supervisory body set up after a truce is in affect.
PARIS, Nov. 2—An effort to protect political prisoners in Vietnam, whose fate under future cease‐fire has become matter of increasing concern, was begun today by Amnesty International.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 2 — The Social Welfare Minister, Tran Nguon Phieu, looks forward to a cease‐fire by Christmas with hope and fear.

JACKSON, Mich., Nov. 2 —Senator McGovern expressed disappointment here tonight at Mr. Nixon's speech, and said, “It does not appear to me that peace is near.”
To the Editor: So at long last—four years and hundreds of thousands of deaths later—President Nixon's secret plan to end the war is revealed. If we look beneath the predictable rhetoric and facesaving machinations.of both parties, the terms seem to be those which any American Government could have negotiated at any time in the past decade—and which presented themselves to Mr. Nixon with particular clarity in 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 2 — As both hope and fear about an end to the war were stirring new political currents in Saigon, thousands of Vietnamese Catholics gathered to mourn today in Mac Dinh Chi’ Cemetery on the ninth anniversary of the death of Presi‐, dent Ngo Dinh Diem.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 2 (AP) —The Defense Department announced today that First Lieut. Carlos A. Pedrosa of the Army, whose home was in Elmhurst. Queens, was killed in action in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Nov. 4 (AP)—Communist war stockpiles were reportedly bombed in South Vietnam, North Vietnam and Laos yesterday by a total of more than 100 United States B.52's.
GENEVA, Nov. 3—Twenty experts in Red Cross relief work met here today to discuss plans for an increase in International Red Cross aid in Indochina in the event of cease‐fire there.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 3—Lonnie D. Franks, the Air Force sergeant who first reported the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam, filed court‐martial charges today at the Pentagon against Maj. Gen. John D. Lavelle and 22 Air Force officers.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 3—North Vietnam responded today with a mixture of perplexity and irritation to President Nixon's insistence last night that an Indochina peace settlement could not be signed until all remaining issues were resolved.
To the Editor: Your Oct. 27 editorial describing Roger Hilsman, Democratic candidate for Representative from the Second Congressional District of Connecticut, as a “distinguished man” is a real puzzler. In all honesty, can this description be applied to a man who as an Assistant Secretary of State under the late President Kennedy played major role in the overthrow of the duly elected President of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem?
CHICAGO, Nov. 3—Senator George McGovern charged tonight that President Nixon had only “pretended” to be near a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war. He said the President's actions were part of re‐election strategy based on “cruel political deception.”

To the Editor: I have expressed my concern that McGovern's plan for total withdrawal from Vietnam would end those refugee and other humanitarian programs which are administered in South Vietnam by a number of this country's voluntary agencies.
To the Editor: Your editorial of Oct. 19 encouraging the “strong support” of candidates— particularly of Constance E. Cook, Assemblywoman from Seneca, Yates and Tompkins Counties—on the issue of abortion is as irresponsible as encouraging voters to appeal to President Nixon to continue the war in Vietnam.
CHICAGO, Nov. 3—Senator George McGovern charged tonight that President Nixon had only “pretended” to be near a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war. He said the President's actions were part of re‐election strategy based on “cruel political deception.”
WASHINGTON, Nov, 3—Senior United States military analysts said today that additional North Vietnamese reinforcements were moving into South Vietnam. Among them, they said, is an armored regiment with about 100 tanks and about 100 armored personnel carriers. It was reported crossing the demilitarized zone into South Vietnam's northernmost province, Quangtri.
Wall Street investors, showing a classic turnabout in market psychology, sent prices soaring yesterday to the highest level in nearly four years, as measured by the Dow‐Jones industrials. Auto, bank, insurance and retailing stocks led the advance.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Nov.4(UPI)—President Nguyen Van Thieu has proposed an alternative to the American ‐North Vietnamese draft agreement that would enable the United States to withdraw from the war but leave him free to negotiate a cease‐fire and political settlement with North Vietnam and the Vietcong, Saigon Government sources said today.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 3—North Vietnam responded today with a mixture of perplexity and irritation to President Nixon's insistence last night that an Indochina peace settlement could not be signed until all remaining issues were resolved.

Although Administration officials continue to insist that peace is at hand in Indochina, the agreement reached by Henry A. Kissinger and North Vietnamese diplomats in Paris last month is coming under increasing attack from the Government of South Vietnam, as might have been expected; and doubts are apparently also being raised within the Nixon Administration itself. Dr. KisSinger originally indicated that the United States was seeking only relatively minor changes in the nine‐point pact that had been outlined by Hanoi; yet the chief American negotiator in Paris Thursday referred to “problems of substance” remaining to be resolved.
PARIS, Nov. 3—The North Vietnamese delegation to the peace talks here issued a statement today saying that President Nixon's speech last night showed an “American refusal to respect its commitments.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 3—Senior United States military analysts said today that additional North Vietnamese reinforcements were moving into South Vietnam. Among them, they said, is an armored regiment with about 100 tanks and about 100 armored personnel carriers. It was reported crossing the demilitarized zone into South Vietnam's northernmost province, QuangLri.
SAIGON, Nov. 3 — A wellplaced source in the Presidential Palace said today that President Nguyen Van Thieu would continue the war if the United States and North Vietnam concluded a cease‐fire that did not provide for the total withdrawal of North Vietnamese troops.
PARIS, Nov. 4—The leader of North Vietnam's delegation in Paris, Xuan Thuy, today signaled a willingness for another session of negotiations for a cease‐fire, provided the United States was “serious.”
WACO, Tex., Nov. 4 — Senator George McGovern warned the American people today not to “buy this Nixon line on peace.”
Two thousand young demonstrators rallied at City College's Lewisohn Stadium yesterday to demand that President Nixon sign the Vietnam peace plan and “end all acts of racial discrimination.”
SAIGON, Nov. 4 (UPI)—South Vietnamese Government sources said today that President Thieu had proposed a counterplan to end the Indochina war.
PARIS, Nov. 4—Following are excerpts from the text of an interview with Xuan Thuy, head of the North Vietnamese delegation to the peace talks, conducted here today by Flora Lewis of The New York Times. The questions were in English and Mr. Thuy answered in Vietnamese. The translation into English was by an interpreter.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 4 (AP)—The Navy said today that Lieut. Mark L. Gartley, one of three prisoners of war recently freed by North Vietnam, was apparently shot down by another American plane during a battle with North Vietnamese MIG's.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Nov. 4—North Vietnam has invited the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Refugees to send a medical group to study immediate and long‐term relief needs.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Nov. 5 —The United States command reported today that B‐52's dropped at least 2,000 tons of explosives on North Vietnam in the 24hour period ending yesterday morning.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Nov. 4 — Secretary General Kurt Waldheim has been asked by “all the parties” to lake, part in whatever Vietnam peace conference will be held.
SAIGON, Nov. 4 (Agence France‐Presse)—The South Vietnamese foreign ministry today strongly denied a foreign news agency report that President Thieu had presented a counter peace proposal.
LONDON, Nov. 4 (Reuters) —The British Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas‐Home, returned today from his first visit to Peking where he had talks with Chinese leaders on major international problems, including Vietnam and BritishChinese relations.
To the Editor:
Senator George McGovern's study group on Africa policy has accused the Nixon Administration of conducting African American relations in such a way as to bring about a repetition of “the Vietnam experience.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov., 4—Despite years of fighting that have largely shattered the Vietcong guerrillas, the Communists in South Vietnam have managed to preserve the core of their political apparatus with what many well‐informed Vietnamese and American officials believe to be a dedicated cadre of 40,000 to 60,000.
ONTARIO, Calif., Nov. 4—President Nixon acknowledged today that there were “some details still to be negotiated” before a peace settlement could be struck in Vietnam. But he said he had full confidence that such a peace would be negotiated on the basis of “honor” and not “surrender.”
“Four more years.” Of what? Germaine Greer claims Arthur Miller gave her the answer in Miami: “If this man wins another term, the Supreme Court will be castrated, and The New York Times will be a single mimeographed page.” Almost this Miller makes me a hardhat. He would no doubt have said the same kind of thing before the 1968 election; yet here is the same old Times, still very fat, like the rest of us. The apocalypse has better taste than to associate itself with American elections. Our party processes mash the. candidates in toward the middle—a law best proved by those who try to defy it, like Senator McGovern. After denouncing the “regulars” in primaries and the convention, he was reduced to shameless capitulation by the end of his campaign; and even then he has been ineffectual. He started too far out from the perceived middle of things.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 4 (UPI) — Vice President Agnew charged today that Senator George McGovern broke all existing records of political irresponsibility when he accused President Nixon of falsely raising hopes for peace as part of his re‐election strategy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 4—The South Vietnamese Government plans to sponsor a rally of 20,000 to 30,000 people in front of Saigon's City Hall tomorrow morning as part of Its campaign to demonstrate popular support for President Nguyen Van Thieu's tough stand against the latest proposed peace agreement.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 4—Sgt. Lonnie D. Franks disclosed today that a former prisoner of war recently released by Hanoi was among the Air Force officers he has named in courtmartial charges stemming from the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam.
To THE EDITOR:
VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 4—North Vietnamese troops, backed by tanks and artillery, made powerful attacks against a number of Laotian Government positions, driving defenders out of some of them, military sources reported today.
To the Editor:
SAIGON South Vietnam, Nov. 5 — Waves of B‐52 bombers dropped nearly 2.5 million pounds of bombs over South Vietnam and the southern part of North Vietnam in the last 24 hours, while Communist forces were reported to be continuing to strike at Government troops with fierce intensity.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 5—A major scandal in the procurement of rice for the 264,000 war refugees living in and around Danang, South Vietnam's second city, has led to the suspension of a number of high officials and a demand by the Cabinet that they and the Mayor of Danang be dismissed.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 5.—The Navy, working on accelerated round‐the‐clock schedules in Southeast Asia, has been staggered by a series of racial brawls and alleged acts of sabotage.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 5—Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that he had “every reason to think” that North Vietnam would agree to resume negotiations in the near future for the conclusion of an agreement to end the Indochina conflict.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 5—Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that he had “every reason to think” that North Vietnam would agree to resume negotiations in the near future for the conclusion of an agreement to end the Indochina conflict.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 5 — Ten thousand to 15,000 Roman Catholics of North Vietnamese origin demonstrated today against the draft peace agreement between Henry A. Kissinger and the North Vietnamese.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Nov. 5—President Nixon said today that whichever candidate is elected President should dedicate himself to 10 goals in the next four years.
SAIGON South Vietnam, Nov. 5 — Waves of B‐52 bombers dropped nearly 2.5 million pounds of bombs over South Vietnam and the southern part of North Vietnam in the last 24 hours, while Communist forces were reported to be continuing to strike at Government troops with fierce intensity.
It is now eleven days since Henry A. Kissinger confidently proclaimed that “peace is at hand” in Indochina, but the war drags on, exacting its ever mounting toll American and Vietnamese lives.
An overwhelming majority of the nation's top businessmen have indicated that they will vote for President Nixon in tomorrow's election and that domestic economic policy is the key campaign issue for them.
The breakthrough toward a Vietnam peace settlement finds the United States with no comprehensive plan to help the survivors in Indochina.
Senator George McGovern declared here last night that the war in Vietnam was “intensifying” rather than coming to an end, and that President Nixon had deliberately misled the nation into believing peace was near.
Senator George McGovern declared here last night that the war in Vietnam was “intensifying” rather than coming to an end, and that President Nixon had deliberately misled the nation into believing peace was near.
To the Editor:
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 5—President Lon Nol has offered complete amnesty to all members of the Khmer Rouge —the Cambodian rebel forces who have been fighting as allies with the North Vietnamese and Vietcong against the Cambodian Government.
THUTHUA, South Vietnam, Nov. 3 — Trinh Van Tuong, a mahogany‐colored man whose world is his rice field, is living with a new kind of excitement that makes him almost bounce when he talks. After all these years, peace seems finally to be within grasp.
HUE, South Vietnam — A dead rat floats down the sluggish water of Sampan Alley where children brush their teeth, and women scrub babies, clothes, and dishes. Men dump garbage in the canal and everyone uses it as a toilet. It is also the home of the Tran family who live on a sampan there.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 6 (Reuters)—The United States command announced today that 1,500 American troops left South Vietnam last week, the largest withdrawal in nine weeks. This left 32,200 United States servicemen in the country.
On Oct. 26, while he was announcing that “peace is at hand” in Vietnam, Dr. Henry Kissinger said with what appeared to be an unimpeachable dignity and pride, “that while it is possible to disagree with provisions of an agreement, the implication that this is all a gigantic maneuver which we will revoke as soon as this period is over is unworthy of what we have gone through.”
THUTHUA, South Vietnam, Nov. 3 — Trinh Van Tuong, a mahogany‐colored man whose world is his rice field, is living with a new kind of excitement that makes him almost bounce when he talks. After all these years, peace seems finally to be within grasp.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Nov. 7 (AP)—Enemy gunners shot down three United States helicopters within 14 miles of Danang Sunday, killing two Americans and wounding three, the United States command announced yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 6 — A high Nixon Administration official said without qualification today that efforts to resume negotiations with North Vietnam on ending the Indochina conflict were “on track” and that some—movement would become apparent in a few, days.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 6 (UPI) —The Supreme Court affirmed today an order invalidating a Federal law that prohibited large‐scale demonstrations on the grounds of the Capitol.In a brief order the Court upheld a three‐judge Federal panel that on June 22 ruled the law unconstitutional.
GAINESVILLE, Fla., Nov. 6 —Seven members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War and a nonveteran supporter pleaded not guilty today to charges stemming from an alleged conspiracy to disrupt the Republican National Convention.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 6—A high Nixon Administration official said without qualification today that efforts to resume negotiations with North Vietnam on ending the Indochina conflict were “on track” and that some movement would become apparent in a few days.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Nov. 6—President Nixon spent the last few moments of his re‐election campaign tonight defending himself against Senator George McGovern's charge that he had deceived the American people about the prospects for a settlement in Vietnam.
WHEELING, W. Va., Nov. (AP) —The Senate Democratic Whip, Robert C. Byrd, has, without mentioning any names, criticized the campaign, positions of the Democratic Presidential nominee, George McGovern.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Nov. 6—President Nixon spent the last few moments of his re‐election campaign tonight defending himself against Senator George McGovern's charge that he had deceived the American people about the prospects for a settlement in Vietnam.
MOSCOW, Nov. 6—The Soviet leadership called upon the Nixon Administration today to sign a Vietnam cease‐fire agreement “as soon as possible.”
PARIS, Nov. 6—The North Vietnamese have professed not to believe that the United States is seriously concerned about Saigon's objections to the cease‐fire agreement negotiated by Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, Hanoi's representative.
PARIS — It is inevitable that the United States must now give priority in its foreign policy over the next four years to relationships with allied countries—above all Western Europe and Japan. The period 1968‐1972 was perforce devoted to finding a solution to the Vietnam war and this could not be done without the tacit assistance of Russia and China.
SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. (UPI)—Fireman Patrick D. Chenoweth, 21 years old, of Puyallup, Wash., was arranged yesterday on a charge that he had delayed the sailing of the aircraft carrier Ranger to southeast Asia for 3½ months.
WASHINGTON, Wednesday, Nov. 8 — President Nixon summoned the nation last night “to get on with the great tasks that lie before us” and, in a later statement to a crowd of cheering supporters, pledged to make himself “worthy of this victory.”
FORT ORD, Calif., Nov. 7 (UPI)—The court‐martial of a black private was recessed today to give his counsel time to find three rebuttal witnesses. The trial of Pfc. Billy D. Smith, will resume tomorrow morning, either with the rebuttal testimony or with closing arguments and instructions to the court‐martial panel of seven officers—five white and two black.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Philip Hart, wife of Michigan's Democratic senator, returned here last night from a visit to Hanoi saying that further delays in signing the settlement with Hanoi would mean delays in the return of American prisoners of war. Mrs. Hart, a member of the National Organization for Women, was accompanied on the trip by two other women.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 8—The war continued yesterday at a level of intensity that was relatively routine but slightly below its level during the last 10 days, the Saigon and American commands reported. Ground infantry engagements, indirect‐fire attacks, naval gunfire missions and tactical and strategic air operations were 10 to 15 per cent below weekend levels.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 6—The President, Marshal Lon No], said today that Henry A. Kissinger had informed him only of the broad terms, not the details, of the proposed peace accord for Indochina, and that even now he was being neither consulted nor promptly or fully informed by the United States on the negotiations with North Vietnam.
HANOI, Nov. 7 (Agence France‐Presse)—The North Vietnamese Communist party daily Nhan Dan disclosed today to its readers that this is Election Day in the United States. This morning it carried a half‐page commentary on the subject under the headline, “The U.S. at the Crossroads.” “The real problem is not who will be elected but the policy that the new President will adopt on the Indochinese problem,” it was observed.
With inflation threatening to get out of hand, the pound sinking and the British social and political fabric in danger of being ripped apart, Prime Minister Heath has frozen wages, prices, rents and dividends for 90 days and has said that some form of controls would follow thereafter. The Tory leader's action was as much of an ideological somersault for him as was President Nixon's wage‐price freeze of Aug. 15, 1971. Conservatives in this country were stunned by Mr. Nixon's adoption of a policy they—and he—had often denounced as not only ineffective but “statist” and even immoral.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 7—Agents of the National Liberation Front have initiated several contacts in recent weeks with members of Saigon's anti‐Government, non‐Communist opposition, apparently in preparation for a cease‐fire and the coming political struggle, according to opposition sources here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Nov. 8—The North Vietnamese Cormmunist party newspaper said today that the draft agreement that was to have been signed Oct. 31 provided for the release of all military and civilian political prisoners in South Vietnamese jails — a provision whose existence was specifically denied by American officials.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 8 — The 38,500 South Korean troops in Vietnam at the behest of the United States and South Vietnamese Governments have effectively retired to their rear bases and have stopped combat operations, according to their headquarters here.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 8 (UPI) —George Meany, president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations, said today that American voters, in soundly rejecting Senator George McGovern for President, had “overwhelmingly repudiated neo‐isolationism” as a basis for foreign policy.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 8 (AP)—Senator William Proxmire to day asked the Air Force to provide proof that the recent loss of three F‐111 aircraft over North Vietnam had resulted from enemy fire and not mechanical failure.
To the Editor:
A pipe bomb was found early yesterday in front of a storefront office of the Committee to Re‐Elect the President, at 4321 Avenue D in the East Flatbush district of Brooklyn. Members of the Police Bomb Division went to the area following an anonymous phone call to United Press International by a caller who said he was a member of the “John Brown Brigade” and that the group wanted to show its solidarity with the Vietnamese people.
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Nov. 8—The Nixon Administration had no formal comment today on the Nhan Dan editorial, but officials noted that the prisoner issue was a sensitive one for North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 8—The White House announced today that Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., chief aide to Henry A. Kissinger, was flying to Saigon to confer with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam on the efforts to conclude an Indochina settlement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 8—The North Vietnamese Communist party newspaper said today that the draft agreement that was to have been signed Oct. 31 provided for the release of all military and civilian political prisoners in South Vietnamese jails — a provision whose existence was specifically denied by American officials.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 9 — The United States military command reports that American 9‐52 bombers set a record Tuesday for concentrated bombing in a !single South Vietnamese province in a single day.
TOKYO, Nov. 8 (Agence France‐Presse) — Eighty‐eight demonstrators were arrested today as they attempted to prevent 13 trailers carrying M‐48 United States tanks for Vietnam from reaching a pier in Yokohama from the United States Army Sagami supply and maintenance depot.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 8—The White House announced today that Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., chief aide to Henry A. Kissinger, was flying to Saigon to confer with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam on the efforts to conclude an Indochina settlement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 9 (Reuters). — Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker called on President Nguyen Van Thieu this morning, possibly to prepare for the visit of Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., the chief aide of Henry A. Kissinger.
MADISON, Wis., Nov. 9 —Nearly 2,000 University of Wisconsin demonstrators marched to the state capital from the library mall in Madison today to protest the continuation of the Vietnam war and the reelection of President Nixon.
In defeat, Senator George McGovern remains an admirable and respected figure. He waged a gallant and often lonely campaign, never losing confidence in his own prospects or, more important, in the rightness of his vision of America. Scorned by his opponent who refused to debate him or even to respond to most of the issues he had raised, Mr. McGovern nevertheless continued hammer away on his major themes, of which he spoke so movingly as he acknowledged defeat late Tuesday night.
SAIGON, Nov. 9 (UPI) —President Nguyen Van Thieu, in a message of congratulations, today told President Nixon that his re‐election was “a most impressive endorsement of the high ideal you stand for.”
MOSCOW, Nov. 8—With unusual speed, the Soviet Union signaled today its clear satisfaction with President Nixon's landslide re‐election victory and offered the prospect of further improvements in SovietAmerican relations in his second term.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y, Nov. 8—Foreign Minister Long Boret said today that Cambodia continued to have doubts that North Vietnam would comply with any peace agreement that would keep Communist troops out of Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 9 (Reuters)—Longbinh camp, the biggest American base in Vietnam and United States Army headquarters for the war, will be formally turned over to. the South Vietnamese Saturday, it was announced today.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9 (AP) —The Defense Department announced today that Capt. Dennis W. Finnegan of the Army, who is from Lynbrook, L. I. had been killed in Vietnam.
WASINGTON, Nov. 9 (AP)—The Army Court of Military Review will open hearings Dec. 4 on First Lieut. William Calley Jr.'s appeal from his murder conviction in the killing of South Vietnamese civilians at Mylai.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9 (AP)—Charges were dropped today against 17 persons, including Dr. Regina Pustan, mother of the world chess champion, Bobby Fischer. They had been accused of blocking the entrance to the office of the Committee for the Re‐Election of the President on Nov. 1.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9—Seciretary of State William P. Rog ers reportedly urged Senator Edward M. Kennedy today not to send a team of five prominent United States physicians to North Vietnam “at this time.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9 (UPI) —President Nixon's landslide re‐election will bring a significant shift to the antiwar movement and return demonstrators to the streets, leaders of the peace movement said today.
PARIS, Nov. 9—The North Vietnamese delegate, a slight man with a heavy overcoat and black‐rimmed glasses stepped quickly up to the microphones on the sidewalk outside the Hotel Majestic. He said a few words, went in, came out three hours later and said a few words more.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 9 (AP)—The United States command reported today that 17 American servicemen were killed in action in Indochina last week and that 2 were wounded.
Although a United States spokesman in Paris has expressed optimism about an early resumption of secret negotiations with North Vietnam, there is disturbing evidence that the delicate fabric of a prospective peace settlement may be in danger of unraveling. Hanoi now also appears to be backing away from important terms of the outline agreement that the North Vietnamese made public last month.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9—President Nixon, promising the American people the rigors of self‐reliance instead of the soft life says he hopes to use the second term to lead the nation out of a crisis of the spirit.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9 —President Nixon has sent a personal letter to the South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu urging him to accept a cease‐fire plan as soon as possible well‐placed Administration officials said today.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9—The following statements by President Nixon are taken from the transcript of an interview last Sunday with Garnett D. Horner, White House correspondent of The Washington Star‐News. The President did not want the interview published in question‐and‐answer form, but he did authorize direct quotation. This summary contains virtually all of his remarks; the material omitted includes two brief comments put off the record at Mr. Nixon's request.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9—President Nixon has sent a personal letter to the South Vietnamese President, Nguyen Van Thieu, urging him to accept a cease‐fire plan as soon as possible, well‐placed Administration officials said today.
PARIS, Nov. 9 (AP) — The United States delegation to the Vietnam talks again expressed optimism today that peace was near, despite another fruitless session at the conference table.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Friday, Nov. 10—General Haig arrived in Saigon this morning, apparently expecting to spend only a couple of days getting President Thieu's agreement to an Indochina peace settlement.
SAIGON South Vietnam, Friday, Nov. 10 (AP)—United States B‐52 bombers struck heavily in the southern part of North Vietnam yesterday and today in a continued effort to blunt a supply build‐up there before any ceasefire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Nov. 11—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., the White House envoy, conf erred with President Nguyen Van Thieu for nearly two hours yesterday amid indications that South Vietnam still has major objections to the peace settlement worked out by Hanoi and Washington.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 10—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., the White House envoy, conferred with President Nguyen Van Thieu for nearly two hours today amid indications that South Vietnam still has major objections to the peace settlement worked out by Hanoi and Washington.
PARIS, Nov. 10—Xuan Thuy, Hanoi's chief delegate to the peace talks here, said tonight that the Saigon Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu and the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government would remain intact “during the transition period” before new South Vietnamese election's.,
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Nov. 11 (AP)—A substantial increase In the number.of American air strikes on the southern panhandle of North Vietnam was reported yesterday by the United States command.
PARIS, Nov. 10—Xuan Thuy, Hanoi's chief delegate to the peace talks here, said tonight that the Saigon Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu and the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government would remain intact “during the transition period” before new South Vietnamese elections.
TOKYO, Nov. 10 (UPI)—A United States Navy‐chartered cargo ship carrying 51 tanks left Japan today for South Vietnam. The tanks were transported to the pier from a U.S. depot near. here Wednesday and Thursday amid violent protest demonstratiops. by. Japanese students and Workers.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 —More than two weeks have passed since President Nixon's chief adviser on foreign policy, Henry A. Kissinger, said “peace is at hand” in Vietnam. The Admin istration remains optimistic but a settlement has so far remained elusive. The following is an effort to sort out what is known about the current situation:
SAIGON—Seldom in the checkered history of the Vietnam war have rumor, maneuver and confusion swirled as thickly in Saigon as in the three weeks since Henry A. Kissinger brought President Thieu the draft of a peace accord worked out with Hanoi. Vietcong agents have been making secret overtures to non‐Communist opponents of the Government who would have a role to play under the proposed transition from war to peace. The neutralists, while eager for a share of power, have been leery of partnership with the Communists. Mr. Thieu has been denouncing the accord as a “surrender” and “sellout.” Sources close to the Presidential Palace have been leaking “counterproposals,” each new one different from the last.
A daughter was born on Oct. 21 at St. Vincent's Hospital to Dr. and Mrs. Alan D. Lichstrahl of New York. The child, named Marni Ellen, is a granddaughter of Judge Milton Sanders of the Civil Court of the City of New York and Mrs. Sanders. Her mother is the former Miss Alison Lou Sanders. The child's father is an orthopedic resident at Flower‐Fifth Avenue Hospital. He recently completed a term of service in Vietnam as a major in the Army. The child is greatniece of Justice Birdie Amsterdam of the New York Supreme Court.
To the Editor: It is impossible for me to reconcile, your editorial stand on Vietnam, as expressed on Oct. 11, with the reality I perceived on a recent visit to that beleaguered country. I found a lively, vital and relatively open society that has made impressive strides in education, medical care, land reform, etc., against what seem insuperable obstacles.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 11 —Well‐placed Administration officials said today that they expected Henry A. Kissinger to return to Paris late next week to begin the concluding phase of negotiations for an Indochina settlement.
PEKING, Nov. 11 (Reuters)—Premier Chou En‐lai apparently has doubts about the Soviet Union's sincerity in wishing to see the Vietnam war end, diplomats said here today, but he says that the question of settling the conflict should be the first problem President Nixon deals with following his election victory.
SAIGON: Not long ago, a key officer in the military office of information told a newsman that his previous job in Washington—he had come from a high information post at the Pentagon—had been much harder. In Washington, he explained, there were continual “leaks” from Capitol Hill that had to be reacted to and denied quickly so as to get the denials into the next morning's newspapers, whereas in Vietnam things were simpler because “there's no competing line.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Nov. 12—After concluding two days of secret talks with President Nguyen Van Thieu, Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. left Saigon this morning for meetings with President Lon Nol of Cambodia and President Park Chung Hee of South Korea, a United States Embassy spokesman said.
TRANGBANG, South Vietnam, Nov. 11 (AP)—Misfortune has again visited Phan Tilt Kim Phuc and her family in the town of Trangbang.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 11 (Reuters)—A total of 1,809 United States military men pre missing or have been captured by “ Commtinist forces in Indochina, according to a revised breakdown of prisoners of war issued today.
TO THE EDITOR: IREAD your article about “Dude” with great humor. Now how about that $100‐billion ‘international hit musical that is going on in Vietnam every day where young men go to their graves like beds—a musical war that is sold out to standing room only all over the world. So say what you want to say. Call me what you call me. Do to me what you do. You still won't get me to hate myself. You won't get me to be like you. You see, I love myself. And I love you, too.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 11—The United States Army today turned.over its huge headquarters base at Longbinh, 16.miles north of Saigon, to the South Viet ’ namese Army. The transfer symbelized the end of direct United States Army participation in the. Vietnam war after more than seven years. About 19,000 Army soldiers remain in South Vietnam, working chiefly as advisers to Saigon Government troops, as helicopter crewmen, and as maintenance, supply and office staff. Under cease‐fire proposals being considered, they would have to leave South Vietnam along with about. 10,000 Air Force personnel, 1,300 Marines, 1,800’ sailors, and 100 Coast Guardsmen within 60 days after the signing of an agreement.
In Harrisburg during the trial, novelist William O'Rourke seemed to be everywhere shaggy enough to give security men some qualms despite his press credentials; young enough to be trusted by the Defense Committee (members of which will surely regret some of their indiscreet comments to him, now put in print). He seemed always to be shaking his wispy hair, as if to say “What madness!” — and I guessed, even then, he would do the best book on the trial. Here is all the madness, distilled:
Wall Street is convinced that peace will break out shortly in Vietnam and that it should have profound implications for the stock market.
Are you ready for another “modern youth” novel? More acid‐trips, highs, bummers, busts, anti‐Vietnam street theater onomatopoeic sex‐lyrics cooking‐oil couplings, race riots, “communal minds,” astrology, Diggers, Black Panthers and White Pigs, the new American Revolution? Will you string along with a lightskinned, prep‐school‐trained black hero from the Caribbean, with a Harvard philosophy degree, eager to “stop doing and just be"? What if he threatens to turn into yet another version of the “tragic mulatto” stereotype—“He has the worst of both worlds: rich intellectual college beatnik to the blacks, dirty loathsome smelly drug‐freak nigger to the whites"? And if he wins turns on, and loses a minister's daughter from mid‐America who then moves beyond him through the stoned range of drugs and sex into transcendental existentailism?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 11 (Reuters) — Charges carrying a possible death penalty have been filed against Gen. Vu Van Giai, whose division retreated from the northernmost province of. Quang Tri at the start of the North Vietnamese offensive, military sources said today.
We are becoming immune to the dramatics of dissent. Where Fox's Book of Martyrs sustained generations of dissenters, today's martyrs are caption fodder, and it's hard to pay attention: Russian dissent, Greek dissent, Brazilian dissent, Nigerian dissent, South Vietnamese dissent, American dissent — the list is endless. There is, however, a sporting element in the way we react to the latest confrontation by wondering, How will they cope with that one? We are connoisseurs of truly unpredictable dissent as we are connoisseurs of the offbeat techniques of suppression and censorship. A recent example that we commend to your attention was dreamed up by the Czech authorities, who are still trying to erase the last traces of 1968's Prague Spring, a task made easier by this year's chumminess
To the Editor: While many of us wallow in the euphoric ambience of an imminent peace settlement, and while Nixon is awash with pious triumph, it may be a sobering thought to reflect on the fact that, in substance, a Hanoi‐U.S. settlement was available to Nixon four years and 25,000 American lives ago. To all but the families of these dead, the point may seem belabored. But to them, and to those of us who abhor the malignancy of Nixon's ambition, the point bears repetition and remembering.
To the Editor: Some day we may awake from the illusion of a safe deterrent, facing the possible unleashing of the remotecontrol slaughter with which governments of East and West have equipped themselves. Should thus the “peace” be questioned, how may we hope for mercy for our childhen while we now are considering killing Vietnamese children for another four years.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Nov. 11 (AP)—President Nixon worked and relaxed in sunny weather today while aides kept him posted on Vietnam peace efforts.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Nov. 12 (AP)—North Vietnam has moved more heavyantiaircraft guns to its southern panhandle in the three weeks that its northern heartland has been off limits to United States air strikes, United States military sources said yesterday.
WASHINGTON—The Navy, with its tradition of Filipino waiters and Southern WASP leadership, never really was an alternative for America's young city blacks during the early years of the Vietnam war. The ghetto youths instead joined, fought and died with Army or Marine Corps ground infantry units.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 11 (AP) — Ten United States C‐141 Starlifter transport planes unloaded 20 propeller‐driven Skyraider bombers at the Pnompenh airport today, according to reports from the capital of Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 12—Informed South Vietnamese and American officials said today that President Nguyen Van Thieu had modified his total opposition to the draft United States‐North Vietnamese peace settlement, but was still unwilling to accept it fully.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 13 — The Communists mounted heavy artillery. barrages while United’ States planes made heavy bombing raids over the weekend as both sides continued to move supplies into South Vietnam in anticipation of a ceasefire, military spokesmen reported yesterday.
HONG KONK, Monday, Nov. 13 (Agence France‐Press)—‐The Peking radio charged today that while rushing arms supplies to South Vietnam, the United States has also been stepping up delivery of war materials to Pnompenh in the last few days.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 12—Gen, Alexander M. Haig, Jr. paid a brief visit to Pnompenh today to meet with President Lon Nol.
JERUSALEM, Nov. 12 (UPI) —Foreign Minister Abba Eban told the Cabinet today that Israel and South Vietnam were discussing the establishment of diplomatic and trade relations diplomatic sources said. He reportedly said that the discussions were at Saigon's initiative.
SEOUL, South Korea, Monday, Nov. 13 (UPI)—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. called on Korea's President Park Chung Hee, this morning and briefed him on the latest developments in the Vietnam peace negotiations.
To the Editor: President Nixon's politically welltimed prospective peace announcements do not alter the fact that even if it all materializes he could and should—in fulfillment of his 1968 campaign pledges—have achieved the result four years earlier. Henry Kissinger's response that at that time “the other side consistently refused to discuss the separation of the political and military issues” scarcely justifies the four years of continuing and escalating warfare, including the bombing and invasion of Laos and Cambodia—actions taken without the consent or knowledge of Congress—and is hardly evidence of earlier Administration eagerness for peace.
To the Editor: It would seem that McGovernites can learn much from the result of the Presidential election. For example, that millions of intelligent, troubled fellow Americans of other political affiliation, too, have high hopes for honorable and lasting peace throughout the world;, that they are also concerned about the war in Vietnam, not only because of the loss of the lives of so many of our youth and those of the aggressors (which the Democrats seemed particularly to stress) but because of the appalling losses suffered by the oppressed South Vietnamese as well.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 13 — The Communists mounted heavy artillery barrages while United States planes made heavy bombing raids over the weekend as both sides continued to move supplies into South Vietnam in anticipation of a ceapefire, military spokesmen reported yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 12—Informed South Vietnamese and American officials said today that President Nguyen Van Thieu had modified his total opposition to the draft United States‐North Vietnamese peace settlement, but was still unwilling to accept it fully.
MOSCOW, Nov. 12 — The Soviet Union displayed today its first signs of impatience and concern with delays in the signing of a Vietnam cease‐fire agreement while American arms shipments to Saigon are speeded up.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13—The Supreme Court cleared the way today for the resumption of the Pentagon papers trial of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony J. Russo Jr., who are accused of making public the top‐secret study of the origins of the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, Tuesday, Nov. 14 (AP)—The United States delivered 31 amphibious vehicles to South Vietnam yesterday as part of its equipment build‐up for South Vietnamese forces.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. returned to Washington this afternoon and immediately flew by helicopter to Camp David. There he reported to President Nixon on his special mission to Saigon to persuade President Nguyen Van Thieu to join with the United States and North Vietnam in reaching an Indochina settlement.
Four peace activists returned from Hanoi yesterday, carrying 150 letters from American prisoners of war. They said that they had spoken with 11 captives during their one‐week stay in North Vietnam.
FORT ORD, Calif., Nov. 13 (AP)—A military jury deliberated for three hours today but failed to reach a verdict in the court‐martial of Pvt. Billy Dean Smith, who is accused of murdering two Army officers in Vietnam.
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, V. I., Nov. 13—Senator George McGovern says he is determined to “keep the heat on” President Nixon to end the Vietnam war, to reduce military spending and to reorder national priorities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 13—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam said today that the visit of Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. had brought the United States and South Vietnam “closer together” on a draft peace settlement. Mr. Lam added that there were still some problems requiring “clarification” before Saigon would accept the accord.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 13—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lain said today that the visit of Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. had brought the United States and South Vietnam “closer together” on a draft peace settlement. Mr. Lam added that there were still some problems requiring “clarification” before Saigon would accept the accord.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13—The Supreme Court cleared the way today for the resumption of the Pentagon papers trial of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony J. Russo Jr., who are accused of making public the top‐secret study of the origins of the Vietnam war.
One can praise David Halberstam's “The Best and the Brightest”—his seventh book and the sequel, in a way, to his earlier book on Vietnam, “The Making of a Quagmire”—for any number of ‘excellent qualities: for its thoroughness and liveliness, for its clarity of detail on such hitherto confusing topics as the events leading up to the Tonkin Gulf, Resolution, or for its singular accomplishment of having retold the whole painful story of the Kennedy and Johnson years, which boils down in essence to the story of America in Vietnam, and made it not only bearable to read, but even tragic in the true and exhilarating sense of that much misused word. But such manner of praise, while de served, is superficial. What seems to me most impressive about “The Best and the Brightest” is Mr. Halberstam's unusual approach to writing contemporary history, and the unusual assets he has forced that approach to yield.
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, V. I., Nov. 13—Senator George McGovern says he is determined to “keep the heat on” President Nixon to end the Vietnam war, to reduce military spending and to reorder national priorities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Nov. 14—The United States command reported yesterday that American planes bombed North Vietnam heavily in a continued effort to block the rush of supplies to Communist forces in South Vietnam.
HONG KONG, Tuesday, Nov. 14 — Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese Politburo member who is in charge of private negotiations with the United States, left Hanoi for Paris today to take part in another round of peace talks, the Hanoi radio reported.
MOSCOW, Nov. 13—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communise party leader called on the United States tonight to remove “the obstacles created by the American side literally on the eve of signing” of a Vietnamese cease‐fire agreement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Nov. 13 (AP) —American military strength in South Vietnam dropped by 1,100 men last week, to 31,100, the United States command announced today. Nine hundred of those leaving were from the Army.
MOSCOW, Nov. 13—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communist party leader, called on the United States tonight to remove “the obstacles created by the American side literally on the eve of signing” of a Vietnamese cease‐fire agreement.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 14 —Henry A. Kissinger conferred with President Nixon and other high officials today as he prepared to depart for Paris to begin what the Administration regards as a crucial round of talks with North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho.
To the Editor: The Oct. 7 letter from former Ambassador John Cabpt criticizing the rationale of your editorial stand On the war reflects very likely the confusion throughout the Department or State during Mr. Cabot's career.
PEKING, Wednesday Nov. 15 (Agence France‐Presse)—North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho, left Peking today for Moscow on the next stage of his trip to Paris to resume talks with Henry A. Kissinger after a one‐month interruption.
To the Editor: In his Nobel Prize lecture, Solt zhenitzyn remarked that one of the prime attributes of “the new barbarism” is to render international agreements illusory, as if they had never existed. The recent letters of Messrs. Crown and Standard and of David Mandel document his point.
Private Smith, a 24‐year‐old black from the Watts section of Los Angeles, was acquitted of six counts of murder, attempted murder and assault. However, he was found guilty of assaulting a military policeman who arrested him soon after the fragmentation grenade exploded on March 16, 1971, at the Bienhoa air base near Saigon. “Fragging” refers to assaults with fragmentation grenades.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 14—South Vietnam's chief delegate to the peace talks, Pham Dang Lam, left Saigon for Paris1 today, as the secret negotia‐1 tions between North Vietnam and the United States appeared about to resume there.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 14 —Henry A. Kissinger conferred with President Nixon and other high officials today as he prepared to depart for Paris to begin what the Administration regards as a crucial round of talks with North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Duc Tho.
MONTREAL, Nov. 14 — For the thousands of draft‐age American men who consider themselves political. refugees in Canada, President Nixon's overwhelniing re‐election wiped out what one of them called “the last small, sneaking hope” that they might soon go home again.
The belief of the Roman Catholic hierarchy that the United States should be generous in granting amnesty to draft resisters has just been reaffirmed by Cardinal Krol, whose statement stands in admirable contrast to President Nixon's hard line. The Cardinal's plea to “blend charity with justice” already has emphatic support from leaders of other churches.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 15—American and South Vietnamese military sources reported yesterday that several North Vietnamese battalion‐sized units had begun pulling back from the area near the demilitarized ‘zone and from the province around Saigon.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Nov. 14 — Cuba spoke up at the United Nations today in opposition to any forceful abtion to curb international terrorism.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 15—South Vietnam, while still trying to press Hanoi and Washington for more favorable peace terms, is quietly preparing to accept a peace settlement when it is finally worked out.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 16—The United States command reported yesterday that American bombers had staged one of the heaviest days of raids of the war on the southern panhandle of North Vietnam.
PARIS, Nov. 15—The Vietcong delegation to the peace talks here asserted today that there had been substantial desertions from South Vietnamese forces last month, and Vietcong battlefield victories.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 15 (AP)—A United States military spokesman reported today that Gen. Vang Pao's army of Meo tribesmen, which the American Central Intelligence Agency finances, had been pushed off the southern edge of the Plaine des Jarres. He said North Vietnamese forces shelled a force of several battalions for six hours Monday night and then made a ground attack Tuesday. The Meo retreated after suffering “moderate” casualties and were trying to regroup to the south, the spokesman said.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 15 —The State Department announced today that Canada, Hungary, Indonesia and Poland had agreed in principle to participate in the international commission that will help supervise a cease‐fire once it takes effect in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Thursday, Nov. 16—The United States command reported yesterday that American bombers had staged one of the heaviest days of raids of the war on the southern panhandle of North Vietnam.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 15—(Agence France‐Presse) — The peace agreement on Vietnam will cover Laos and Cambodia as well, Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn, President of the Thai National Executive Council, said here today.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 15 —The State Department announced today that Canada Hungary, Indonesia and Poland had agreed in principle to participate in the international commission that will help supervise a cease‐fire once it takes effect in Vietnam.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Nov. 15 (AP) — Willard E. Chambers, a senior official in the American pacification protram in South Vietnam, has resigned his $42,000‐a‐year job “in sheer disgust with the leadership and the philosophy being applied” to what he calls much maligned cause.
WASHINGTON — The hoped ‐for Vietnam settlement, if it materializes, would be a triumph of personal diplomacy. It could only have been accomplished by Henry Kissinger working with the President alone. But will the President draw the wrong lessons from this experience, as well as from his Moscow and Peking “triumphs,” about how to make policy?
PHILADELPHIA—For a variety of reasons, the Nixon Administration has moved boldly to negotiate an end to U.S. participation in the Vietnam war. The reasons relate only in part to the war's debilitating effect on the American global posture and to its rending impact on the American domestic scene.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 16 (AP)—The United States command announced today that eight Army, Navy and Air Force units totaling 585 men had been deactivated.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 16 (AP) —A board of three officers will visit First Lieut. William L. Cal ley Jr. on Nov. 27 to hear his appeal for clemency in the 20 year sentence he is serving for the slaying of civilians at Mylai.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 16 (AP)—American offi cials, headed by Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker, conferred again today with South Viet namese officials on the draft Indochina peace accord.
PARIS, Nov. 16—The North Vietnamese delegation to the Vietnam peace talks said today that Le Duc Tho would arrive here tomorrow for further pri vate talks with Henry A. Kis singer but would not discuss any modification of the sub stance of their draft agreement on a cease‐fire in the war.
PARIS, Nov. 16 — However rapid or arduous renewed nego tiations on a Vietnam cease fire prove to be, both Washing ton and Hanoi have indicated that they have no intention of making more major concessions at this stage.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 16—No. 59397, a four‐ engine C‐141 jet cargo plane of the Air Force's 63d Military Airlift Wing, rolled to a stop on the tarmac at Tansonnhut Air Base at 10:42 A.M. after a 3‐hour‐40‐minute flight from Kadena Air Base on Okinawa.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 16—A key Administration official dis missed the statements made by the North Vietnamese and Viet cong representatives in Paris today as irrelevant to the efforts to conclude an Indo china settlement.
Spokesmen for two antiwar groups said yesterday that peaceful demonstrations would he held tomorrow in 20 major cities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Nov. 17 (AP)—United States planes kept up intensive bombing of North Vietnamese supply lines yesterday, and pi lots reported having knocked out 68 trucks loaded with am munition.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 16 — Quoting their exhortations of a year ago for an end to the Vietnam war “with no further delay,” the Roman Catholic Bishops of the United States expressed hope today for a suc cessful outcome of the present negotiations and appealed for an end to “bombing and ter rorism.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 17— The White House announced today that Henry A. Kissinger would return to Paris on Sun day to resume on Monday ne gotiations with North Vietnam that the Administration hopes will produce an Indochina set tlement within weeks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 17 — President Nguyen Van Thieu and his top aides are rushing to complete the organ ization of a new mass political party, with membership of 100,000 that Mr. Thieu hopes will enable him to compete ef fectively with the Communists under a cease‐fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 17 (Reuters)—The Gov ernment seized today's issues of four Vietnamese‐language dailies, one of them, Trang Den, for printing a cartoon critical of President Nixon.
COLUMBUS. Ga. Nov. 17 (UPI) — S. Sgt. Kenneth L. Hodges, who was accused in the Mylai slayings in Vietnam, appealed yesterday in United States District Court for a per manent injunction to stop the Army from discharging him.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 17 — President Nguyen Van Thieu and his top aides are rushing to complete the organ ization of a new mass political party, with membership of 100,000 that Mr. Thieu hopes will enable him to compete ef fectively with the Communists under a cease‐fire.
It is hardly surprising that the ques tion of civilian prisoners has emerged as a key stumbling block to peace in Vietnam. Inasmuch as most “neutral ist” leaders in South Vietnam have either been driven into exile or are in prison, the release and return of many of these people will obviously be necessary for the realization of any tripartite administrative council pro posed by the nine‐point plan.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 17— The White House announced today that Henry A. Kissinger would return to Paris on Sun day to resume on Monday ne gotiations with North Vietnam that the Administration hopes will produce an Indochina set tlement within weeks.
My son Keith is a victim of the Vietnam war as surely as if he were missing in action. It is nearly two years since I have seen or heard from him, and when next we shall meet, if ever we do, is problematical. For Keith is one of those numberless young Americans (how many? no one knows) who, caught in the trap of military service, found no answer but deser tion.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Nov. 18 (AP)—Mili tary sources reported yester day that some United States planes that had been bombing North Vietnam had been as signed instead to give dose sup port to South Vietnamese troops in increasingly sharp ground action around Quangtri.
PARIS, Nov. 17 — Le Duc Tho arrived here today for an other round of negotiations with Henry A. Kissinger and said his aim was the rapid con clusion of the “agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in Vietnam.”
A sense of relief greets the news that Henry Kissinger will be on his way to Paris tomorrow for that long‐ awaited and, hopefully, final meeting with North Viet nam's peace negotiators.
SALINAS, Calif.—The Nixon Admin istration has loaded the news media with military‐game words that roll off of political tongues like buttered pop corn. The simple word that they choke on is amnesty. First used by the Athenians to patch up their rebellion torn city in 403 B.C., it could be used again in 1972.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 17 (Agence France‐Presse) — Offi cial sources reported today that North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces had reoccupied the southern Laotian town of Sara vane.
For the Media, a Baby Boon
PARIS — Vietnam was still at war and the Paris peace talks were still marking time. But preparations were completed last week for another — and final, the United States says — round of cease‐fire negotiations, and the sense of an impending end to the bloody, interminable conflict was pervasive.
Antiwar protesters marched through the streets of midtown Manhattan and 19 other cities across the country yesterday, calling for an immediate end to the war in Indochina. 
Much ado has been made of Senator McGovern's claim that the present “peace” negotiated by Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho could have come about four years ago. Looking at the essence of that “peace,” it becomes clear that what it proposes is total U. S. withdrawal while Hanoi's invad ing force becomes established as a legal resident of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 18 (Reuters)—South Viet nam's National Security Coun cil met with President Thieu to day and semi‐official reports later said it had agreed not to change Saigon's opposition to several sections of the draft cease‐fire agreement. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 18 (Agence France ‐ Presse) — North Vietnamese and Viet cong soldiers and Cambodian guerrillas have pulled out of the area of the Angkor temples and Government forces have occu pied the area, according to re ports circulating here today. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 18— President Nixon interrupted his stay at Camp David today to return to the White House for final consultations with Henry A. Kissinger, who leaves tomor row for Paris to resume nego tiations with North Vietnam on Monday. 
These last eight years since the Berkeley Free Speech move ment and the Vietnam escala tion have surely been the most convulsive in the history of American higher education. Caught between political pres sure from its students and younger faculty and the finan cial revenge of alumni and government, the university reeled into the spotlight of a whole nation's agony and be came the battleground for every problem from war and racism to sexism and inflation. Nor has the crisis abated now that public confrontation has given way to student apathy and frustration, faculty attri tion and unemployment, and the fiscal desperation of har ried administrators, some chosen mainly to manage crises of a different sort.
It would seem as if the proponents of the domino theory in Southeast Asia are determined to prove them selves correct. In the past several weeks, the Administration has seen fit to send into South Vietnam a seemingly unending stream of ma tériel. This represents, without doubt, the biggest gamble on the part of the United States since our military escalation in 1965.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 18—A United States Government in telligence study reports that in 1971 the Soviet Union supplied $1.1‐billion worth of military assistance to the less developed countries. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Nov. 19—American air strikes against North Vietnam fell off sharply yesterday, and ground fighting in South Viet nam continued the decline be gun two weeks ago, allied mili tary spokesmen said. 
Now that President Nixon has opened up a speaking relationship with Communist China, developed a commer cial and economic détente with Communist Russia and indicated a policy of peace and reconstruction for Com munist North Vietnam, it would logically follow that he miss no opportunity to begin what may well be the most touchy of all such maneuvers vis‐a‐vis the Communist world: an unfreezing of United States relations with Cuba. Although in comparison to China, Russia or even Hanoi, Castro's Cuba is not much more than a roaring mouse, it is still—geographically, politically and emo tionally—a major disturbing factor in the foreign policy spectrum of the Americas, particularly of the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 20—Heavy shell ing hit South Vietnamese ma rines and armored cavalry troops Saturday as they con tinued their four‐day‐old push north of Quangtri city, South Vietnamese military spokesmen reported yesterday.
PARIS, Nov. 19—Henry A. Kissinger and a team of aides arrived here tonight to start another round of negotiations on a cease‐fire in Vietnam. The talks start tomorrow.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 19 (AP)—Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker met for 30 minutes to day with President Nguyen Van Thieu, the United States Em bassy announced. They were believed to have discussed the coming round of private peace talks in Paris.
PARIS, Nov. 19—Henry A. Kissinger and a team of aides arrived here tonight to start another round of negotiations on a cease‐fire in Vietnam The talks start tomorrow.
FAYETTEVILLE, Ark., Nov. 19—A Vietnam veteran who is charged with sending a bomb threat here has said that Wil liam L. Lemmer, who has been identified as a key witness in a grand jury investigation of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War, wrote the bomb threat and told him to mail it.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Nov. 21 (AP)—Com munist‐led forces shelled the Danang area before dawn to day, launched a series of hit and‐run attacks in the Saigon region and engaged Government troops for the fifth day just south of the demilitarized zone.
PARIS, Nov. 20—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam opened another round of negotiations for a Vietnam cease‐fire today.
SAIGON, Tuesday, Nov. 21 (AP)—President Thieu has ask ed President Nixon to receive a special envoy who would out line South Vietnam's objections to the draft proposal for a cease‐fire, a Government offi cial said today.
BANGKOK, Thailand—It is hardly surprising that the anomalies, the bitter ironies and the Catch‐22 lunacy that have marked America's Indochina in volvement from the beginning should characterize also its final phase. A conflict that has cost the United States more than $150 billion, 47,000 dead or missing, 300,000 wounded and at least a decade of moral agony without achieving a single decisive victory— or even becoming legally a “war”— could hardly be expected to be resolved in a clear‐cut, rational fashion. And the evidence of the Nine Points Agree ment indicates that it will not be.
PARIS, Nov. 20—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam opened another round of negotiations for a Vietnam cease‐fire today.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 20 (UPI) —The Pentagon said today that it had essentially com pleted an urgent program to arm South Vietnam with 10,000 tons of new military equipment before the withdrawal of Amer ican forces.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 20—The South Vietnam ese Senate voted overwhelm ingly today to support Presi dent Nguyen Van Thieu's pub lic opposition to the draft peace accord unless all North Viet namese troops are withdrawn from the country.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 20— The State Department an nounced that Secretary of State William P. Rogers met in New York today with Mitchell W. Sharp, the Canadian Minister of External Affairs, to discuss the operations of an interna tional supervisory commission once a cease‐fire takes effect in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 20 (AP) — The United States Command reported to day that American troop strength in South Vietnam dropped by 1,500 men last week to a total of 29,300. This is just 2,300 short of the ceiling of 27,000 men set by President Nixon for Dec. 1.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21 (AP) — The Air Force dis missed today charges filed early this month against Maj. Gen. John D. Lavelle and 23 other officers accused of carry ing out illegal bombing strikes against North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 22 (AP) — South Vietnamese troops, aided by waves of United States B‐52 heavy bombers, repulsed a Com munist assault in the Central Highlands yesterday.
A few minutes before President Kennedy was shot in Dallas nine years ago today, two of his traveling companions, Dave Powers and myself, in the motorcade close behind his limousine, were saying how happy he seemed that morning. As longtime aides to the President, Dave and I had seen him through many memora ble days but we never saw him in a better mood than on that trip to Texas.
PARIS, Nov. 21—The Vietnam cease‐fire talks continued to day, with no indication of what progress was being made.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 21—The South Vietnamese Gov ernment is carrying out a pro gram of political indoctrination and organization in expecta tion of a cease‐fire about the beginning of January. That is the date Government planning seems to assume the shooting will stop and the political strug gle will begin.
OTTAWA, Nov. 21 (UPI)— External Affairs Minister Mitch ell W. Sharp of Canada said today that he thought the United States Government now had a better understanding of why Canada would not yet commit herself to participating in a proposed truce observation force in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 22 (Agence France‐Presse)—Gen. Nguyen Van Thanh, former commander of the Cao Dai military forces, was killed just before dawn to day when a plastic charge went off at the Caodist monastery at Tayninh, Government mili tary spokesman said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 21—The South Vietnamese Gov ernment is carrying out a pro gram of political indoctrination and organization in expecta tion of a cease‐fire about the beginning of January. That is the date Government planning seems to assume the shooting will stop and the political strug gle will begin.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 21. Delegations of the Laotian Gov ernment and the Communist led Pathet Lao held their sixth weekly peace negotiating ses sion today, after which each side accused the other of wait ing for a settlement in Vietnam before getting down to serious discussion.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Nov. 21—Some see a certain irony in the jailing of Samuel Lewis Popkin. A specialist in Vietnamese village life, he continued to deal with Gov ernment experts despite his growing personal opposition to the war. He was once in vited to the White House to discuss Vietnam with Henry A. Kissinger, a for mer colleague at Harvard. And al though he would certainly not be considered a conservative, he has earned the enmity of radical students because, he says, he has not been a dogmatic critic of American policy.
PARIS, Nov. 21—The Vietnam cease‐fire talks continued to day, with no indication of what progress was being made.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 22—American intelligence officials report that Hanoi has ordered Communist forces in South Vietnam, both Vietcong and North Vietnamese, to ob serve a cease‐fire scrupulously for the first 60 days after it goes into effect and to refrain from all acts of vengeance, as sassination and terrorism dur ing that period.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 22 (Reuters)—Enemy forces are putting heavy pressure on Cambodian troops in Takeo Province on the border with South Vietnam, the Cambodian command here reported today.
MONTGOMERY, Ala., Nov. 22 (UPI)—Gov. George C. Wallace today called for Thanksgiving Day prayers for an early settle ment of the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 23—A United States B‐52 bomber crashed last night after a bombing run over North Vietnam. Military sources said it was the first of the war to be lost to enemy fire.
An inspiring modern fable might well have told the story how a lowly sergeant caught the generals in the act of falsifying the records after they disobeyed the President of the United States. In this historic fairy tale, the sergeant would have triumphed over the awesome preponderance of rank. The brass would have been sternly held to account. The system which allowed such flagrant defiance of civilian policy by the military would have been reformed. The sergeant would have received the public thanks of the President.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 22—American Intelligence officials report that Hanoi has ordered Communist forces in South Vietnam, both Vietcong and North Vietnamese, to ob serve a cease‐fire scrupulously for the first 60 days after it goes into effect and to refrain from all acts of vengeance, as sassination and terrorism dur ing that period.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 23—A United States B‐52 bomber crashed last night after a bombing run over North Vietnam. Military sources said it was the first of the war to be lost to enemy fire.
PARIS, Nov. 22—Negotia tions on a Vietnam cease‐fire continued for a third day here today, and another session was reportedly set for tomorrow.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 22 — Administration officials said today that the chances seemed remote that more than a token international supervisory com mission of Canadians, Hungari ans, Indonesians and Poles would be in operation at the time of a cease‐fire in Vietnam.
VIENTIANE, Nov. 22 (UPI)— Prince Souvanna Phouma, the Laotian Premier, said today that he had a commitment from the United States to continue bombing in Laos if an expected Vietnam war settlement did not include a cease‐fire in his country.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 22 —An American spokesman re ported today that Laotian Gov ernment forces had taken the town of Saravane in southern. Laos from North Vietnamese troops after a week of fight ing. Heavy casualties were re ported on both sides.
PARIS, Nov. 23—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho met for six hours today in continu ing efforts to complete an agreement for a cease‐fire in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam (AP)—One American was killed in combat last week, two died of nonhostile causes and two were wounded, the United States command reported. to day.
PARIS, Nov. 23—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Due Tho met for six hours today in continu ing efforts to complete an agreement for a cease‐fire in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Nov. 24 — The south ern part of North Vietnam came under heavy bombing by United States planes again yesterday, with high‐flying B‐52's carrying the major burden as bad weather cut strikes by fighter bombers.
Canada is showing justifiable reserve in engaging itself in the Vietnam cease‐fire supervisory task, along with Indonesia, Hungary and Poland, before clear and effective ground rules can be defined and accepted by all parties involved. From the start Dr. Kissinger has acknowledged the difficulty of the supervisory task. At best it will be a delicate job, at less than best it will be futile.
The mood of the crowd varied from the smugness of experi‐ enced parade watchers around 77th Street and Central Park West, where the Thanksgiving Day parade started, to the im patience of thousands who waited in the cold shadows of midtown department stores, where the parade ended.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Nov. 24 — The south ern part of North Vietnam came under heavy bombing by United States planes again yesterday, with high‐flying B‐52's carrying the major burden as bad weather cut strikes by fighter‐ bombers.
The history of our part in the con flict in Vietnam will soon begin to be written and most scribes will un doubtedly call this war unpopular and senseless. There is no doubt that it is unpopular, but the many truths about Vietnam should not be obscured just because people do not like this fight. The fact remains that our pres ence in Vietnam has slowed the advance of Communism.
It is regrettable that so distinguished a scholar as Eugene Rostow should do disservice to a cause he has well served in public life. I refer to his con tentions (letter Nov. 15) concerning the rights and obligations of the United States under regional collective se curity arrangements in general and the South East Asia Treaty in partic ular. The terms and the legislative history of that treaty make clear the limits of the undertaking and neither required nor justified U.S. military in tervention in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Nov. 25 (AP)—Heavy B‐52 raids continued against. North Vietnam yesterday as the United States sought to cut the flow of military supplies Communist forces in South Vietnam.
PARIS, Nov. 24—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho met for about an hour this morning, the fifth day of their current talks, after letting out word that there would be no meeting to day in the effort to complete a Vietnam settlement.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 24—The United States and Thailand have agreed to the maintenance of a substantial American military presence — mainly air power—on Thai soil for an unspecified period after a Vietnam cease‐fire, according to senior officials here.
Aubrey L. Cox, in his eminently rea sonable “War‐Permit Application” [Op Ed Nov. 15], has omitted a provision which requests the names and ad dresses of at least three military ex perts who are familiar with the record of the applying country and who are competent to pass judgment upon its application.
GIF‐SUR‐YVETTE, France, Nov. 23—The 10,000 or so citizens of this semirural ex tension of Paris face with equanimity the prospect that the Vietnam war may soon be ended with the Peace of Gif sur‐Yvette.
PARIS, Nov. 24—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho met for about an hour this morning, the fifth day of their current talks, after letting out word that there would be no meeting to day in the effort to complete a Vietnam settlement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 24—The relationship be tween President Nguyen Van Thieu's Government and the United States has been funda mentally altered by the prog ress toward a peace settlement in the last six weeks, and Thieu does not seem to know quite what to make of it. The United States Em bassy is saying that the allies can accept the conces sions being made by the Communists because the Vietnamization policy has succeeded in defeat ing the enemy on the battle field and making him sue for peace on favorable terms.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 24—A close aide of Pres ident Nguyen Van Thieu said today that no progress had been made toward a peace set tlement in the first four days of renewed secret talks in Paris between the United States and North Vietnam.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 24—The United States and Thailand have agreed to the maintenance of a substantial American military presence — mainly air power—on Thai soil for an unspecified period after a Vietnam cease‐fire, according to senior officials here.
In his zeal to reassure him self and his readers of the soundness of past literature on North Vietnam, John S. Carroll (“After we get out, will there be a bloodbath in South Vietnam?”, Oct. 15) violated the first rule of honest argumentation, which is to represent with reason able accuracy the text which you wish to refute. Having chosen my “revisionist” cri tique of past and present alle gations of a “bloodbath” in North Vietnam as his target, Carroll manages nevertheless to avoid reference — with a single exception—to any of the specific evidence which I have offered in the two which he cites.
PARIS — Henry Kissinger's “one more round” of negotiations “lasting three or four days” stretched through six days last week, and still there was no glimpse of an agreement to end the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 25— The Nixon Administration sought to convey the impres sion today that Henry A. Kis singer's return from Paris did not mean that the negotiations with North Vietnam on reach ing an Indochina settlement had broken down.
BOSTON — Manacled, wrapped in chains, Professor Samuel L. Popkin of Harvard was led off to prison last week after a futile 15‐month legal bat tle. The tall, 30‐year‐old political sci entist, a specialist in Vietnamese vil lage life, thus became the first American scholar ever to be jailed for protecting his sources of information.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Nov. 25 (Agence France‐Presse) — North Vietnam and Bangladesh have decided to extend diplo matic recognition to each other, Foreign Ministry sources said here today.
PARIS, Nov. 25—The current series of talks on a cease‐fire in Vietnam ended today with the announcement that they would resume on Monday, Dec. 4.
MANILA, Nov. 25 — The Philippine Government to day announced the arrest of an American Vietnam war vet eran in connection with what it called a “rightist conspiracy” involving top Philippine politi cians to assassinate President Ferdinand E. Marcos and stage a coup d'etat.
A nationwide post‐election Gallup Poll indicates that Americans approve of the way President Nixon is proceeding to bring the Vietnam war to an end. The poll shows almost as great a margin as Mr. Nixon's election victory over Senator George McGovern.
The Nov. 12 letter by Prof. Sheldon Penman needs some clarification.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Nov. 26 — United States B‐52 bombers yesterday main tained the intensive level of aerial bombardment of North Vietnam that began on Monday —the day the peace talks re sumed in Paris.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 24 — Intelligence analysts here foresee no dramatic increase of Communist‐led insurgency in Thailand after a Vietnam set tlement even if American air bases remain on Thai soil.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 26 (AP)—North Vietnamese gunners for the second straight day pounded South Vietnamese marines ad vancing up the coastal plain below the demilitarized zone military sources reported to day.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 26 — North Vietnam has requested the postponement, for the time being, of a visit to Hanoi by five United States physicians.
TOKYO, Nov. 26 (AP)— China and North Vietnam signed today in Peking an “agreement on China's gratui tous economic and military materials assistance to Viet nam in 1973” and a “protocol on China's gratuitous supply of military equipment and mate rials to Vietnam in 1973,” Hsinhua, the official Chinese press agency, reported.
American prisoners of war in North Vietnam will each be allowed to receive an 11‐pound package and a card from their families for Christmas, accord ing to Cora Weiss, co‐chairman of the Committee of Liaison With Families of Servicemen Detained in North Vietnam.
SAIGON, Monday, Nov. 27 (UPI)—United States B‐52 bombers resumed heavy raids on North Vietnam's panhandle during the night, striking sus peeled supply areas in 12 for mations, the United States com mand said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 25—Even as the United States military is packing up for its expected exit from Vietnam, American offi cials here arc secretly planning a major postwar presence of United States civilians in Viet nam, with many of them doing jobs formerly done by the mili tary.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 27 (AP)—Ambas sador Ellsworth Bunger met for 10 minutes this morning with President Nguyen Van Thieu at Independence Palace. a United States Embassy spokesman said. What they discussed was not disclosed.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 26 — The White House said today that, after conferring with Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon remained confident that. an Indochina settlement would be achieved, but it was unclear how long this might take.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 25—Even as the United States military is packing, up for its expected exit from Vietnam, American offi cials here are secretly planning a major postwar presence of United States civilians in Viet nam, with many of them doing jobs formerly done by the mili tary.
President Nixon returned yesterday to the church in which he worshiped as a New Yorker and in which his daughter, Julie, was married and heard the Rev. Dr. Norman Vincent Peale extoll him as “one of the great peacemakers of history.”
ANNAPOLIS, Md.—In the selection of American decision ‐ makers, politi cians are subject to scrutiny, and sus picion but it appears generals are not. Much of this has to do with the myth that military men simply follow the orders of elected officials; that is, im plement the decisions of politicians. But it is the military which develops the critical input into much of the for eign policy decision‐making process. Military men often carry out their own policies, as has so often been the case in Vietnam.
No matter what happens after the Indochinese peace talks resume on Dec. 4, it now seems reasonably clear that Dr. Henry Kissinger had little basis for his statement on Oct. 26, twelve days before the election, that “peace is at hand,” subject only to a few minor details of negotiation. He had, it is clear, no real agreement with Hanoi and Saigon on ending the war; no such agreement seems to exist a month later; and it is highly question able whether either Dr. Kissinger or President Nixon could have believed on Oct. 26 that they actually had reached an agreement that would bring what Mr. Nixon called that night in Ashland, Ky., “peace with honor and not peace with surrender.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 27 (UPI) — Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, told the Pentagon yesterday that it should make public full details of war crimes committed by American servicemen in Viet man that the Defense Depart ment said it had substantiated through investigations.
HONG KONG, Nov. 27 — An agreement for Chinese eco nomic and military aid to North Vietnam in 1973 was signed in Peking yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Nov. 28 (AP)—Heavy fighting was reported on the northernmost front of South Vietnam yesterday, and Gov ernment forces were said to have made some gains in their drive to expand the territory they control before any cease fire.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 27— President Nixon met twice with Henry A. Kissinger on Vietnam today and Mr. Kissinger made a rare trip to the State Depart ment to confer with Secretary of State William P. Rogers, as Administration officials pri vately asserted that efforts to achieve a settlement of the war were on course.
SEATTLE, Nov. 27 (AP) — Frank Markoe Sibley Jr., the bicyclist who hijacked a jet liner and demanded ransom money for war‐crippled chil dren in Vietnam, was sentenced to life in prison today. But Judge Morell Sharp of the United States District Court made the sentence contingent on the outcome of a three‐ month study of Sibley's back ground and physical and men tal condition.
One month has elapsed since that dramatic White House briefing by Dr. Henry Kissinger. “We remain con vinced that the issues that I have mentioned are soluble in a very brief period of time,” President Nixon's negotiator said. “We have undertaken, and I repeat it here publicly, to settle them at one more meeting and to remain at that meeting for as long as is necessary to complete the agreement.” This undertaking to the people of the United States and of Vietnam has now been broken. Perhaps the reasons are technical, but there are ominous signs that more profound considerations may be promoting ruinous second thoughts.
COLUMBUS, Ga., Nov. 27—A military panel that could rec ommend that First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. be uncondi tionally released spent two hours today with the 29‐year‐ old Army officer, who was con victed last year of murdering 22 South Vietnamese civilians.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 27— President Nixon met twice with Henry A. Kissinger on Vietnam today and Mr. Kissinger made a rare trip to the State Depart ment to confer with Secretary of State William P. Rogers, as Administration officials pri vately asserted that efforts to achieve a settlement of the war were on course.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 27—According to informed speculation in South Vietnam ese political circles, President Thieu's special assistant, Mr. Duc, is bringing with him to Washington a request for an American ‐ South Vietnamese summit meeting.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Nov. 28 (Agence France‐Pressel — Nhan Dan, the official party newspaper, said today that a report of an unsuccessful re bellion by North Vietnamese military men against leaders of the Vietcong in South Vietnam was a “ono hundred per cent” fabrication intended to serve the “psychological warfare” purposes of the Central Intelli gence Agency in the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 29—The Unit ed States command reported yesterday that six American fighter ‐ bombers supporting South Vietnamese troops killed at least 19 civilians and wound ed 29 in a misdirected attack in the northern part of the country.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 29—The Unit ed States command reported yesterday that six American fighter ‐ bombers supporting South Vietnamese troops killed at least 19 civilians and wound ed 29 in a misdirected attack in the northern part of the country.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 28 (Reuters) — Nguyen Phu Duc, the South Vietnamese envoy, arrived here tonight to con sult tomorrow with President Nixon on the peace negotia tions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 30 (AP)—Bad weather reportedly slowed fighting yesterday on the north ernmost front of South Vietnam where Government troops were trying to widen their control of territory before any cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 29 — Well‐placed Administration of ficials reported today that a number of concessions were made by North Vietnam in the most recent phase of peace talks in Paris. But the officials, in various departments of Gov ernment, said at least two or three major differences re mained to be resolved before a cease‐fire agreement was ready for signing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 29 (AP)—A military court sentenced the former deputy commander of Military Region II to five years on probation today for the fatal shooting of his army servant.
Peter Joseph Brennan, who was nominated to he Secre tary Of Labor yesterday, con fidently expressed the view one day this fall that organ ized labor could handle any battles it might race in the nation. But he said he was gravely concerned about any concessions or show of weak ness by this coun try toward the Communists in North Vietnam.
A tight military control in Thailand, the declaration of martial law in the Philippines, abolishing opposition in South Vietnam, a self‐made dictator in Cambodia and voting an indefinite presidential term in South Korea present a serious blow to democracy in East Asia. The Republic of China on Taiwan is the only one of our allies (excepting Japan) in the Pacific that is steadily improving its democratic basis by enlarging the membership in both Legislative and Control Yuans and National Assembly.
FORT BENNINGTON, Ga., Nov. 29 (AP)—The command ing general of Fort Benning denied today First Lieut. Wil‐ Liam L. Calley Jr.'s request to attend arguments in his appeal to the Army Court of Military Review to have his conviction overturned.
HONG KONG, Nov. 29— China expressed strong criti cism of the United States today as having failed to conclude a truce agreement with Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 29 — Well‐placed Administration of ficials reported today that a number of concessions were made by North Vietnam in the most recent phase of peace talks in Paris. But the officials, in various departments of Gov ernment, said at least two or three major differences re mained to be resolved before a cease‐fire agreement was ready for signing.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 30 —The Joint Chiefs of Staff reviewed the Southeast Asian situation with President Nixon today and told him, according to a well‐placed Administration official, that they supported the terms of the projected settlement in Indochina now being negotiated with North Vietnam and being urged on South Vietnam.
HOUSTON — President Nixon has described the cease‐fire terms, first reported by Hanoi radio on Oct. 25 and discussed by Mr. Kissinger at a press conference the following day, as “peace with honor and not peace with surrender” and as ushering in what he has called “a generation of peace.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Dec. 1 (AP)—The United States command reported yesterday that no American servicemen were killed in Indochina last week in either combat or accidents.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 30—Political figures inside and outside the Government say that President Nguyen Van Thieu is forging plans for major changes in his Cabinet, based on the conviction that a cease‐fire will come to Vietnam soon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 30—Recent Communist radio broadcasts have been mentioning the names of members of the National Liberation Front and Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam, apparently in a campaign to make them recognizable figures after a cease‐fire, American analysts believe.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 30—Political figures inside and outside the Government say that President Nguyen Van Thieu is forging plans for, major changes in his Cabinet, based on the conviction that a cease‐fire will come to Vietnam soon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 30—Tin Song, the quasiofficial Saigon newspaper, said today that South Vietnam and the Communists should begin negotiating directly and do away with “go‐betweens.”
PARIS, Nov. 30—North Vietnam's spokesman at the Vietnam talks here, Nguyen Thanh Le, today reiterated Hanoi's position that the demilitarized zone between North and South Vietnam had been established by the Geneva Accords of 1954 as a “provisional military demarcation line” and of no lasting political or territorial significance.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 30 —The Joint Chiefs of Staff reviewed the Southeast Asian situation with President Nixon today and told him, according to a well‐placed Administration official, that they supported the terms of the projected settlement in Indochina now being negotiated with North Vietnam and being urged on South Vietnam.
P. S. YOUR NOT LISTENING. By Eleanor Craig. 215 pages. Illustrated. Richard W. Baron. $5.95.
PARIS, Nov. 30—William J. Porter, the chief United States delegate to the Paris peace talks, affirmed to the Vietnamese Communist negotiators today that President Nixon intended “to permit no avoidable delay” in ending the war.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 30 (Agence France‐Presse) Military sources reported today that North Vietnamese and Vietcong gunners shelled Komnong Cham, a province capital 70 miles northeast of Pnompenh, with heavy rockets, killing two students and wounding 20 civilians. Seven 122‐mm. rockets of Soviet make were said to have struck the center of the city.
The Nixon charge of a “bloodbath” in North Vietnam after the 1954 Geneva Conference has been widely debated but silence shrouds the bloodbath which did occur in the South at the time. This is curious and unfortunate, since the conditions which gave rise to the savage repressions of the Diem regime have persisted in Saigon and the peril of repetition is not small.
SAIGON, Saturday, Dec. 2 (AP)—A South Vietnamese general, four other Vietnamese and two United States officials were killed yesterday when a military plane taking them on a visit to refugee camps crashed on the central coast northeast of Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 1 — American intelligence sources say that North Vietnam has shifted almost all its antiaircraft defenses to its southern sector, in what they interpret as an indication that Hanoi does not expect to provoke the United States into resumption of the bombing farther north.
The stock market turned strong yesterday after three days of consolidation, sparked by optimistic reports that Vietnam cease‐fire was near.
LONDON, Dec. 1—As Le Duc Tho and Henry Kissinger approach another round of talks, there are the most directly conflicting estimates of the prospect for agreement. Pessimistic reports from Paris say that the United States has attempted to reopen basic issues in the draft Vietnam peace terms published in October. But Washington officials, privately and publicly, gay they are extremely optimistic that a final settlement will be reached soon.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 1—The United States continued today to urge South Vietnam to agree to the Indochina settlement that the Administration believes will emerge in Paris after Henry A. Kissinger resumes negotiations with North Vietnam on Monday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 1 — American intelligence sources say that North Vietnam has shifted almost all its antiaircraft defenses to its southern sector, in what they interpret as an indication that Hanoi does not expect to provoke the United States into resumption of the bombing farther north.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 1—The United States continued today to urge South Vietnam to agree to the Indochina settlement that the Administration believes will emerge in Paris after Henry A. Kissinger resumes negotiations with North Vietnam on Monday.
As the chief negotiators of the United States and North Vietnam prepare for another round of secret talks in Paris there are signs that a cease‐fire, although not necessarily a durable peace, may at last be “at hand” in Indochina.
Every day, like millions of others; I follow, the reports of the increasingly dubious peace negotiations in Paris. We see photographs of Dr. Kissinger smiling, always smiling—a man happy at his work. At the same time we read that today was the heaviest bombing of the war, and again tomorrow it is heavier still. 
WASHINGTON—Henry A. Kissinger, seemingly confident that after more than a month's delay peace is really “at hand,” is scheduled to fly to Paris today for what the Administration bills as the final “final” round of negotia tions with the North Vietnamese. 
SAIGON—Wanted: aircraft mechan ics, radar operators, data processors for highly classified material. Immedi ate openings. Must be United States citizens.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Dec. 3 (AP)—South Viet nam's northern counteroffen sive was reported bogged down in rain and mud yesterday, but American B‐52 bombers kept hammering the desolate foot‐ hills below the demilitarized zone. 
 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 2“I had the illusion,” Henry Kissinger said pri vately before leaving for Paris, “that maybe we could get through these peace negotiations without heart break, but that was probably expect ing too much. The war has been heartbreaking from the beginning.” 
LONDON, Dec. 2 (AP)—Am nesty International says that it has told President Nixon and Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam it is concerned about safeguards to be pro vided for 200.000 civilians held in South Vietnam when the war ends. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 2—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho are expected to ar rive at a final negotiated peace settlement, substantially along the lines disclosed in October, after two or three days” of talks in Paris next week, ac cording to informed South Viet namese sources close to the ne gotiations. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 2— Henry A. Kissinger received his final instructions—and some words of encouragement—from President Nixon today as he prepared to leave for Paris to morrow for what the Adminis tration hopes will be the con clusive round of negotiations with North Vietnam on an In dochina settlement. 
Letters to the Editor
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Dec. 2 —President Nixon announced today that Henry A. Kissinger would continue to serve as his adviser on national security af fairs in the second Nixon Ad ministration and that a num ber of other top‐level White House staff members would also remain in their present jobs.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 2 (Agence France‐Presse)—The North Vietnamese Government has introduced a series of new measures aimed at reintegrat ing war veterans into society, the North Vietnamese press re ports. 
BEIRUT, Lebanon, Dec. 2— An organization to provide Pal estinian guerrillas with protec tion and support is to be set up by Arab leftists and Commu nists with the backing of the world Communist movement. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 2 (AP)—The small‐town boy who won the first Medal of Honor in Vietnam looks back “with mixed feelings of frustration and achievement” as the long est war in American history seems to be drawing to a close. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 3 (Reuters)—Lawyers for First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. will argue before three judges tomorrow that the 29‐year‐old officer's trial on Mylai murder Charges was unfair because of influ ence by the Army.
PARIS, Monday, Dec. 4 —Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, arrived here last night to start another round of Vietnam cease‐fire negotiations today.
TORONTO, Dec. 3—“Enough indignities have been suffered by our ancestors in the name of research,” Harvey McCue, an Ojibwa Indian, told a meeting of anthropologists here the other day. “Anthropology as discipline can assist in sensing those aspects of contemporary society that discriminates against native people, but think it's time for a moratorium on further digging.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 4 (Reuters) South Vietnam's National Security Council went into special session today only hours before the secret Paris peace talks were about to resume.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 4 (AP)—Communist‐led forces launched their second rocket attack in four days on the big Bienhoa air base northoest of Saigon, where the United States is stockpiling aircraft to reinforce the South Vietnamese air force before a cease‐fire, the Saigon command reported today.
HONG KONG, Dec. 3—The official North Vietnamese newspaper Nhan Dan warned in an editorial today that any attempt by the United States to revise the Vietnam peace agreements as announced by Hanoi last month would mean that Washington's real intention was to scrap the accord and continue the war.
PARIS, Monday, Dec. 4—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, arrived here last night to start another round of Vietnam cease‐fire negotiations today.
President Nixon has decided to preserve unchanged the imbalance in the making of foreign policy, at least until his prime international objective—peace in Vietnam—is achieved. That is the plain import of his reappointment of Secretary of State Rogers, coupled with his announcement that Henry A. Kissinger will stay in the White House.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 4 (UPI)—American officials said today that fighting for control of Saravane in southern Laos was continuing. Government troops were said to have driven occupying North Vietnamese troops to the northern tip of the town, killing 30.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 5 (AP) — Heavy American bombing attacks were flown yesterday in the northernmost province of South Vietnam in an attempt to curb the resupply of North Vietnamese troops fighting a Government counteroffensive.
The Presidential adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, flies to Paris, to Saigon, to Paris, and always back to Washington, saying, “peace, peace,” when there is no peace. The war in Indochina goes on, for there can finally be only one victor and one vanquished force in that struggle, and neither yet concedes defeat.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 4 (UPI) —The Air Force rejected today Senator William Proxmire's suggestion that the controversial F‐111A jet fighter should be grounded.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 4—A Vietnamese source close to President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that he was convinced Mr. Thieu would sign the cease‐fire agreement that is expected to emerge from this week's meetings between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho.
PARIS, Dec. 4—The Vietnam cease‐fire talks were resumed once more here today.
SYDNEY, Australia, Dec. 4—Young Australians who have refused military service have been given a virtual reprieve in anticipation of a promised repeal of the draft law by the incoming Labor Government of Gough Whitlam, the Prime Minister‐designate.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 4—A Vietnamese source close to President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that he was convinced Mr. Thieu would sign the cease‐fire agreement that is expected to emerge from this week's meetings between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 4 — American troop strength in South Vietnam dropped to 25,500 at the beginning of this month‐1,500 fewer men than President Nixon's authorization of 27,000, the United States command announced today.
SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 4 (Reuters)—A lawyer hired by leaders of the Buddhist movement in South Vietnam has filed a $400‐million suit in Federal court here, seeking damages from First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. and the United States Government.
FALLS CHURCH, Va., Dec. 4 —Attorneys for First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. argued today that the slain villagers of Mylai 4 did not qualify for protection as prisoners of war wider international law because they were not recognizable as noncombatants at a distance.
After the embattled carrier Kitty Hawk docked in San Diego the other day following a record‐long tour of war duty off Vietnam, crewmen indicated that one of the principal causes of a bloody racial fracas at sea had been the belief of black sailors that they had been subjected to unequal disciplinary treatment.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 5 —Well‐placed Administration officials report that Henry A. Kissinger is raising questions with North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris about intelligence reports showing that Hanoi, after a cease‐fire, intends to hide much of its army in South Vietnam in Vietcong units.
CANTHO, Vietnam, Dec. 5 (UPI) — About 200,000 South Vietnamese Government workers staged a widespread series of demonstrations today to denounce Communism in general and the Vietcong in particular.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 5—The knowledge that a cease‐fire in Southeast Asia may truly be at hand has thrown the families of the 1,268 missing Americans and 554 prisoners of war onto the cruelest of roller‐coasters, swooping between exhilaration and dread.
HANOI, North Vietnam—There is growing skepticism in North Vietnam about Washington's willingness to sign the nine‐point peace agreement —or to implement it, if signed.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 5 —Well‐placed Administration officials report that Henry A. Kissinger is raising questions with North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris about intelligence reports showing that Hanoi, after a cease‐fire, intends to hide much of its army in South Vietnam in Vietcong units.
PARIS, Dec. 5—The Vietnam cease‐fire meeting scheduled for today was suddenly canceled this morning, and both the American and North Vietnamese delegations announced that they would meet tomorrow morning at 10:30.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 5—Prince Souvanna Phouma, Premier of Laos, expressed the belief today that there was a chance peace would soon return to Indochina but he reiterated his Government's intention to fight on unless North Vietnamese troops left Laos.
Letters to the Editor
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 6 (AP)—Vietcong gunners rocketed Saigon's big Tansonnhut air base shortly after dawn Wednesday, killing one American and wounding nine others.
NEW HAVEN — The constructive results of China's turn to the United States during the last year are beginning to be visible, even in Vietnam, Korea and the Middle East. At long last Soviet policy shows signs of restraint, which have been reinforced by a disastrous harvest and the necessity of relying on the United States for food.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 6—The Nixon Administration has ordered that postwar aid programs gave highest priority to the resettlement and rehabilitation of the millions of refugees dislocated by the fighting in South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, a well‐placed Administration official said today.
SAIGON, Thursday, Dec. 7 (AP)—The area from which Communist rockets struck Tan?onnhut air base yesterday was reported attacked soon afterward by about 1,500 Government troops supported by armored vehicles and air strikes.
Reports from Washington and Saigon that the North Vietnamese are planning to hide much of their army in South Vietnam in Vietcong units after a cease‐fire should come as no surprise. It is only to be expected—if they agree to pull out their troops in the first place, which is not yet certain.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 7 (UPI)—The United States Ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, met with President Nguyen Van Thieu for more than an hour today, apparently to discuss progress at the Paris peace talks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 7 — American planes flew tactical air strikes within 10 miles of Tansonnhut Airport last evening in an attempt to hit back at Vietcong forces that fired rockets into the huge Saigon air base earlier in the day.
The telephone company yesterday advised relatives wishing to exchange holiday greetings by telephone with servicemen in Southeast Asia to arrange beforehand to have the servicemen place the call from Vietnam.
PARIS, Dec. 6—The Vietnam cease‐fire talks resumed today after a 24 ‐ hour pause during which President Nixon sent what the White House called detailed new instructions to the American negotiators.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 7 — American planes flew tactical air strikes within 10 miles of Tansonnhut Airport last evening in an attempt to hit back at Vietcong forces that fired rockets into the huge Saigon air base earlier in the day.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 6—The Nixon Administration has ordered that postwar aid programs give highest priorty to the resettlement and rehabilitation of the millions of refugees dislocated by the fighting In South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, a well‐placed Administration official said today.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 7—The State Department has quietly alerted 100 Foreign Service offi cers to prepare to go to South Vietnam, once a cease‐fire is declared, to check on how the truce is being observed, depart ment officials said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 7—South Vietnam's For eign Minister, Tran Van Lam, said today that the Saigon Government “would not refuse to do whatever can be done to free the American prisoners of war” and could even agree to release political prisoners in its jails to help bring about an ac ceptable cease‐fire accord.
Gold medals for “distin guished service to humanity” were awarded to three recipi ents at a dinner of the Na tional institute of Social Sci ences in New York last night, but a fourth medalist—Dr. Henry A. Kissinger was un able to attend. The President's chief national security ad viser was detained in Paris by the Vietnam peace nego tiations. The three who did make it were Mrs. Laurance Rockefeller, member of the National Board of the Y.W.C.A. and chairwoman of its world relations commit tee: Ambassador George Bush, United States perma nent representative to the United Nations, and Arch bishop Fulton J. Sheen, for mer Auxiliary Bishop of New York and national director of the Society for the Propaga tion of the Faith.
CRANE, Ind.—Every week day morning for the last sev eral years, Mrs. Patricia Ash has awakened around 5 A.M., fed and sent her two teen‐ aged children off to school and driven 26 miles to work here. Her earnings of $3.84 an hour, combined with her husband's income from a gas station, mean that the Ash family can have new clothes more often and live consid erably better than it expected to a few years ago. But when peace comes in Vietnam, that may all end. For like several thousand other workers here in south western Indiana, Mrs. Ash's income depends on war. She makes bombs.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 7 (AP)—A United States military spokesman said today that Gov ernment irregulars had seized Pak Song, a provincial capital near the center of the Boloven Plateau 290 miles southwest of Vientiane. North Vietnamese troops, who drove the Laotians from the plateau last year to halt raids on the nearby Ho Chi Minh supply trail, were moving south from Pak Song, the spokesman added.
PARIS, Dec. 7—While Henry A. Kissinger continued his pri vate cease‐fire talks with the North Vietnamese, delegates of Hanoi and the Vietcong deliv ered a message of toughness today in the formal negotiations a few miles away.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 7 (AP)—The United States com mand announced today that no Americans had been killed in action in Vietnam last week for the second successive week. But it said that three Americans died from noncombat causes, one was missing or had been cap tured, and seven were wound ed.
Why did less than half of the eligible 18‐to‐21‐year‐olds vote? What turns off the educated new genera tion?
WASHINGTON, Dec. 7—The State Department has quietly alerted 100 Foreign Service offi cers to prepare to go to South Vietnam, once a cease‐fire is declared, to check on how the truce is being observed, depart ment officials said today.
JERUSALEM, Dec. 7 (Reuters) —Israel and South Vietnam formally announced today that they reestablished diplomatic relations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 7—South Vietnam's For eign Minister, Tran Van Lam, said today that the Saigon Government “would not refuse to do whatever can be done to free the American prisoners of war” and could even agree to release political prisoners in its jails to help bring about an ac ceptable cease‐fire accord.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Dec. 8 (AP) — B‐52's have dropped more than 600 tons of bombs in and around the de militarized zone, the United States command reported yes terday.
DANANG, Vietnam, Dec. 8 (AP)—About 50,000 school children, waving small South Vietnamese flags and chant ing anti‐Communist slogans, filled the Danang stadium to day for a rally in support of the Government. Schools were closed so that they could attend.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 8 (Agence France‐Presse)—for the first time the Hanoi press referred indirectly today to the secret peace negotiations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 8—President Nguyen Van Thieu is preparing to address a special joint session of both houses of South Vietnam's Na tional Assembly next Tues day, authoritative Government sources said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 8—Saigon is a city sus pended these days in one of those gray and shadowy time warps that bind the end of something old and familiar to the beginning of something new and strange.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 8 (AP) — Pentagon sources report that Communist‐led guerrillas re cently attacked a base in east ern Thailand from which Unit ed States Air Force technicians control electronic surveillance of North Vietnamese supply routes through southern Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 8—Saigon is a city sus pended these days in one of those gray and shadowy time warps that bind the end of something old and familiar to the beginning of something new and strange.
CANBERRA, Australia, Dec. 8 (Reuters) — Most of the 128 advisers in the Australian Army assistance group in South Viet nam should be home by the end of next month, one of the election pledges of the new Labor Government, authorita tive sources said here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Dec. 9 (AP)—North Viet namese supply routes in and near the demilitarized zone came under heavy United States bombing yesterday for the second day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 8—The spokesman for the South Vietnamese Foreign Min istry issued a clarification to day of a statement made in an interview with Foreign Minis ter Tran Van Lam. A dispatch based on the interview ap peared in today's issue of The New York Times.
ABOARD U.S.S. RANGER, in the Pacific, Dec. 9 (AP)— When sailors aboard the air‐ craft carrier Ranger off Vietnam finish their day's duty, they go to school, at “Top Gun Uni versity.”
PARIS—All last week, Henry Kis singer and Le Duc Tho continued their secret negotiations for a Vietnam cease‐fire. The world learned each day where the White House aide and the Hanoi emissary met, what time they entered whichever private house they used, what time they emerged. Tele vision and newspapers showed them shaking hands and smiling. There were pictures of the black cat that jumped on the roof of the white car used by Mr. Kissinger.
W. W. Rostow has written some good books. This is not one of them. Rostow, who served as an adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, 1961‐69, proposes to write the his tory of the years 1957‐72, as one who has had a hand in making it. This is a perfectly legitimate under taking whose ancestry stretches from Thucydides and Julius Caesar to Churchill and Eisenhower. Others, such as Bismarck, have left us a kind of political autobiography by record ing their part in the events and re flecting upon it. Rostow has done neither but has combined the two.The hybrid form, of which this book is neither the first nor likely to be the last example, is bound to make for bad history. For the discipline of the historians' craft within which the historian must labor is vitiated by the author's concern to make sure that the reader does not miss the role he has played, and to justify it. Thus the perspective from which his tory is viewed becomes distorted. What ought to be at the periphery is moved into the center, and what is placed in the center could not pos sibly have been so central as it is made to appear. Much that deserves mention in a work of history is not mentioned at all, and some in formation is so trivial as to be out of place even in an autobiography.Thus we are told that the author was in his bath when President John son called him, and that President elect Kennedy came out of his bath when Rostow called upon him. I do not doubt that these are facts, but they certainly are not historic facts because they are of no interest to posterity. Twice Rostow quotes from remarks he made at a Pugwash Con ference, and he tells us what he said at the debriefing and that he was invited to dinner by one of the Rus sian participants. Many of us have had repeatedly similar experiences without being conscious of their his toric or even autobiographical signif icance. With Vietnam on his mind, Rostow tells us: “I left the White House just before noon on Jan. 2, 1969 with the hope that Nixon would decide to stay the course.” One al most sees darkness at noon closing in on the President's mansion.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Dec. 10 (AP)—American B‐52's kept up heavy bombing of enemy supply and troop con centrations along the demili tarized zone for the third straight day yesterday.
SAN DIEGO, Dec. 9—Anti war activists are raising ques tions about military plans that would require each returning prisoner of war to spend at least several days, and perhaps weeks, at an overseas hospital before he sees his family or talks to newsmen.
BONN, Dec. 9 (Reuters)— West Germany has told North Vietnam that it wants to supply large‐scale aid towards recon struction after a cease‐fire, the daughter of President Gustav Heinemann reported.
ROROS, Norway, Dec. 9 (UPI)—Actress Jane Fonda, a harsh critic of the war in Vietnam, said today that she would marry Torn Hayden, one of the members of the radical “Chicago Seven” anti‐ war group.
MOSCOW, Dec. 9—The So viet Union and North Vietnam concluded today a new agree ment for economic and military aid to Hanoi.
Henry Kissinger once referred to Metternich as the Prime Minister of Europe; his recent global peregrina tions now suggest that Kissinger is himself acting as quasi‐Prime Min ister of the World. Metternich, the Austrian architect of the Congress of Vienna in 1815 which tried to restore the world of the anciens regimes, has become, if not a house hold word, at least a handy model for discussing our own Henry Kissin ger. In an irritatingly uneven study of Kissinger, David Landau con tributes mightily to this myth; and, for good measure, adds a dose of dubious psychohistory.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 9 (AP)—Laotian irregulars were said to have repelled a North Vietnamese counterattack yes terday in Saravane, 280 miles southeast of Vientiane, accord ing to a United States military spokesman.
MAHWAH—There is only one fraternity on the new campus of Ramapo College, and most of its members went through their initia tions in places like Vietnam and Cambodia.
PARIS, Dec. 9—The talks on a Vietnam cease‐fire continued today with only a sharp state ment from the leader of the Vietcong delegation here to break the public silence.
TIENTSIN, China, Dec. 10 (Agence France‐Presse)—Prince Sihanouk, the former Cambo dian chief of state, who main tains close relations with Premier Chou En‐lai of China, believes that sooner or later “Vietnamese and Laotian pa triots will have to return to combat whether they want to or not,” after an Indochina cease‐fire.
LONDON, Dec. 10—At what we hope is the brink of success for Henry Kissinger in his long search for peace in Vietnam, it is fascinating to look back at the paper in which he roughed out his approach to the negotiations. That was his article of January, 1969, in Foreign Affairs.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 — President Nixon conferred for 75 minutes today with Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., key aide to Henry A. Kissinger at the secret Paris talks with the North Vietnamese. But the White House continued to pro vide no information on how close the two sides had come to concluding an Indochina settlement.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 (UPI)—The destroyer War rington, which was damaged by American mines off North Vietnam last July 17, may be scrapped, the Navy said to day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 11 (AP)—Enemy attacks across South Vietnam declined sharply, the Saigon command reported yesterday.
ROME, Dec. 10 (UPI)—Pope Paul VI today appealed to Christians everywhere to offer a special prayer at Christmas for peace in Vietnam. “Christ mas is the day of the declara tion of peace on earth,” he said in his weekly noon blessing in St. Peter's Square. “Will we have it at least in Vietnam? Or is it still far off?”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 7—Despite daily assertions by the Communists that the Saigon Government is planning a campaign of mass arrests and assassination of political prison ers, a series of interviews with sources in close touch with the national police as well as with Vietnamese opposition political figures has disclosed no evi dence to support the charges.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 11 (AP)—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam said to day that North Vietnam was insisting that its troops remain in South Vietnam after a cease fire. He did not rule out the possibility of the United States and Hanoi signing a cease‐fire lagreement without Saigon's concurrence, but he said: “It's hard to believe there will be a separate settlement.”
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 — President Nixon conferred for 75 minutes today with Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., key aide to Henry A. Kissinger at the secret Paris talks with the North Vietnamese. But the White House continued to pro vide no information on how close the two sides had come to concluding an Indochina settlement.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Dec. 11—The Mayor of Danang, Col. Nguyen Ngoc Khoi, was relieved of his duties today, a month after the South Viet namese Cabinet demanded his dismissal for his part in a refu gee‐aid scandal here.
PARIS, Dec. 11—Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho met for more than four hours today and scheduled three separate sessions for tomorrow in the negotiations for a cease‐fire in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 12 — President Nguyen Van Thieu proposed to day an indefinite truce between South and North Vietnam to begin before the Christmas holi day.
QUANGTRI, South Vietnam, Dec. 10—while world leaders struggle over cease‐fire terms in Paris, in this desolate and war‐ravaged region of South Vietnam, men continue to spend their days killing and being killed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 12 — President Nguyen Van Thieu proposed to day an indefinite truce between South and North Vietnam to begin before the Christmas holi day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 12 (UPI)—Heavy raids, by United States B‐52's were flown yesterday in the Saigon area.
CANBERRA, Australia, Dec. 11 (AP)—The new Labor party Governments of Australia and New Zealand today announced details of their military with drawal from South Vietnam.
PEKING, Dec. 11 (Agence France Presse)—Premier Chou En‐lai said tonight that there was a passibility that an Amer ican‐Vietnamese peace agree mnt would be concluded in the next two or three days in Paris.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 11 (AP)—United States troop strength in Vietnam dipped slightly last week to 25,200 men, the United States command announced today. This was a decrease of 300 from the previous week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 12—President Nguyen Van Thieu's call for a Christmas truce and an exchange of prisoners left many South Viet namese and American officials here today with the impression that Mr. Thieu was once more trying to forestall a cease‐fire accord he dislikes by offering new terms of his own.
PARIS, Dec. 12 —Henry Kissinger has been living during the critical last days of the Vietnam peace talks in the old Rothschild house, now the Ameri can Embassy, at No. 41 Rue du Fau bourg St. Honore, down this glittering street from where President Pompidou of France resides in the Elysee Palace.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 12—The Nixon Administration refused any public comment today on President Nguyen Van Thieu's speech setting forth Saigon's objections to the Paris peace talks and his own proposals for ending the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 12 (AP) —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that he was asking that prisoners of war and the missing in action be exempted from a White House ordered freeze on promotions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 13 (AP)— Ground action in South Viet nam was reported at a low level yesterday, and infiltrat ing North Vietnamese troops who had come under strong attack northwest of Saigon were said to be fleeing back to Cambodia.
PARIS, Wednesday, Dec. 13 —The current phase of the Vietnam peace negotiations is coming to an end here with one difficult unresolved ques tion.
PARIS, Wednesday, Dec. 13 —The current phase of the Vietnam peace negotiations is coming to an end here with one difficult unresolved ques tion.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 12—The attitude of the Cam bodian Government toward the Indochina cease‐fire now being negotiated seems to have changed from one of wishful ness and plaintive optimism to more realism and worry.
PARIS, Dec. 13—Henry A. Kissinger flew home tonight, ending an arduous round of Vietnam cease‐fire talks with out having solved the central problem—political control of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 13—A well‐informed source said today that he had been told by President Nguyen Van Thieu that a plan that would have opened the way for Saigon's endorsement of a peace accord had been rejected at the secret talks in Paris.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 13— Irregular troops fighting for the Laotian Government have com pleted the capture of an im portant town on the western approach to the Ho Chi Minh Trail network adjoining South Vietnam, a military informant reported today.
President Thieu is, naturally, still trying to win at the negotiating table what his armed forces and those of the United States have failed to win on the battlefield. That is the simple meaning of the condition which he required Mr. Kissinger to press upon the North Viet namese negotiators in the most recent round of Paris talks: a formal and unequivocal statement from Hanoi that the Saigon Government is the sole sovereign author ity over South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Viettam, Thursday, Dec. 14 (AP)—Amer ican sources reported yester day that almost 100 tanks and several thousand North Viet namese troops had moved through mountain passes from North Vietnam to the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos and were heading southward.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 13— The White House said today that President Nixon would confer with Henry A. Kissin ger “first thing tomorrow morning” to review Mr. Kis singer's just‐concluded round of talks in Paris and to dis cuss the outlook for a nego tiated settlement of the Viet nam war.
PARIS, Dec. 13—Henry A. Kissinger flew home tonight, ending an arduous round of Vietnam cease‐fire talks with out having solved the central problem—political control of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 14 (AP)—The United States command reported today that one American was killed in action in Indochina last week, the first in three weeks.
PARIS, Dec. 14—All four delegations to the regular for mal Vietnam negotiations pub licly recorded their explana tions today of why almost a month of private talks had failed to result in agreement.
PARIS—Maurice Schumann, present tenant of the Quai d'Orsay, by nature an optimist, is also one of the most energetic of France's Foreign Minis ters. He seems to see this country as a kind of swing‐man, initiating ideas or diplomatic contacts between dis puting parties around the world. He certainly has no illusions that this old nation remains a superpower but obviously doesn't feel it therefore con demned to intellectual or political stagnation.
PARIS, Dec. 14—All four delegations to the regular for mal Vietnam negotiations pub licly recorded their explana tions today of why almost a month of private talks had failed to result in agreement.
PARIS, Dec. 14—The Vietnam peace talks in Paris are still going on, but the point of decision is really back in the White House, where it has been from the start. The question now is whether President Nixon is prepared to make a separate peace with Hanoi and the South Vietnamese Commu nists, and so far he has held back.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 14 — The White House formally dis sociated itself today from the cease‐fire proposal made two days ago by President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam and said it would sup port only the plan that Henry A. Kissinger has been negotiating with the North Vietnamese in Paris.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Dec. 15 (AP) — Enemy gunners fired rockets at Bien hoa air base and an outlying village 15 miles northeast of Saigon in a predawn attack to day.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 14 — The White House formally dis sociated itself today from the cease‐fire proposal made two days ago by President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam and said it would sup port only the plan that Henry A. Kissinger has been negotiating with the North Vietnamese in Paris.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Dec. 15 (AP) — Enemy gunners fired rockets at Bien hoa air base and an outlying village 15 miles northeast of Saigon in a predawn attack to day.
SAIGON, Friday, Dec. 15 (UPI) — American B‐52 bomb ers flew 33 missions averaging three planes each over North and South Vietnam in the 24‐ hour period ended at noon yes terday, the United States com mand said. Fourteen of the mis sions were directed over the North — one short of the rec ord, of 15 set by the big bomb ers three weeks ago.
PARIS, Dec. 15—Le Duc Tho flew to Moscow today on his way home to Hanoi to report on his 15 negotiating sessions with Henry A. Kissinger.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 15— Henry A. Kissinger met with President Nixon today for the fourth time in two days and conferred individually with other high Administration offi cials on the outlook for a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war.
LONDON, Dec. 15—There is won derful irony in the belief, now being expressed on all sides, that the United States can have peace in Vietnam if only it acts despite the objections of Nguyen Van Thieu, For American in dependence of Saigon has always been a prerequisite of any negotiated settle ment.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Dec. 16—American B‐52 bombers stepped up their raids on North Vietnam to a record of 16 missions during the 24‐ hour period ended at noon yes terday, United States military spokesmen reported.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 15 — With another round in the Paris negotiations ended and with Henry A. Kissinger back in Washington briefing officials, many important questions re main unanswered publicly, and uncertainty and confusion con tinue to surround the talks. Fol lowing are some of the ques tions and an attempt to define the situation that now exists:
A report that a cease‐fire in Vietnam was, imminent sparked a rally in the stock market yesterday, but a denial from Washington halted the buy ing and the market closed on the fence.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 15—It has long been a mock‐serious journalistic dic tum here that “there are no facts in Vietnam.”
WASHINGTON, Dec. 15— Henry A. Kissinger met with President Nixon today for the fourth time in two days and conferred individually with other high Administration offi cials on the outlook for negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war.
HONG KONG, Saturday, Dec. 16 (Reuters)—The Viet cong charged today that the United States was trying to prolong the Vietnam war and warned it was ready to fight on until victory.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 16 —Four Americans, includ ing retired Brig. Gen. Tel ford Taylor and folk singer Joan Baez, flew to Hanoi to day carrying some 500 letters and a duffel bag of gifts for American prisoners of war in North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 16 — Peace was “at hand,” Henry A. Kissinger told a group of news men crowded into the White House briefing room on Oct. 26. Following is a chronology of events surrounding the Paris peace talks since then.
Following is a transcript of the opening statement by Henry A. Kissinger yester day at his news conference in Washington and excerpts from the question‐and‐an swer period that followed, as recorded by The New Yorh Times through the facilities of A.B.C. News:
WASHINGTON, Dec. 16— There are many cryptic sayings about Vietnam and the war there. Today we publish the most cryptic of all.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 16 (AP) — A few hours after Henry A. Kissinger acknowledged a de Jay in reaching a Vietnam cease‐fire agreement the White House made public a review that termed the United States role in peace negotiations near ly completed.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 16 (UPI)—Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn said today that he had given approval to the United States to move its mili tary headquarters from Saigon to a remote base in Thailand only 60 miles from North Viet nam if a cease‐fire went into effect in Vietnam.
PARIS, Sunday, Dec. 17 — The North Vietnamese delega tion to the Paris peace talks today termed “completely un true” charges by Henry A. Kissinger that the Communists had demanded changes in the Vietnam cease‐fire agreement.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 16— Henry A. Kissinger said today that the negotiations between the United States and North Vietnam had so far failed to reach what President Nixon re garded as “a just and fair agreement” to end the Viet nam war.
MOSCOW, Dec. 16—High So viet officials today assured Le Duc Tho of unswerving support for North Vietnam's aims after he had briefed them on the latest round in the Paris peace talks with Henry A. Kissinger.
BALTIMORE, Dec. 16 (AP)— An eight‐year smuggling con spiracy brought heroin into the United States inside the bodies of soldiers killed in Vietnam, according to testimony from military and customs men in Federal court here.
SAN DIEGO, Dec. 16—When Lieut. David Matheny drove home for lunch the other day, he saw that his wife's car was gone. He turned around and left without even going in.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Dec. 17 (AP)—A South Vietnamese general reported a North Vietnamese troop build up yesterday near Bienhoa air base, which has been shelled by enemy gunners for two suc cessive days.
Dr. Kissinger's astonishing news conference was clearly aimed at put ting the blame on the North Viet namese for the impasse now reached in the Paris negotiations. This pos sibility had been telegraphed last week when an American spokesman in Paris said the Communist side was dike “the high‐pressure salesman who tries to obtain immediate signature of an incomplete contract.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 18 (Reuters)— A fully laden C‐130 Hercules transport took off from Tan Son. Nhut air base today, carrying home about 60 Aus tralian soldiers and ending Australia's role In the Viet nam war.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 17 — Henry A. Kissinger, in his news conference yesterday, gave the Administration's rationale for the failure so far to achieve a negotiated settlement of the Vietnam war. Mr. Kissinger's presentation answered some of the questions that have arisen recently, left others unanswered, or in dispute and raised some new ones. What follows is an effort to clarify what is known, what is not known, and what can only be surmised.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 17—The negative turn in the Paris peace negotiations provoked a com mon reaction of disappointment among Senators today, but it was still unclear whether the disappointment would lead to renewed criticism of the Administration's Vietnam policies.
PEKING, Monday, Dec. 18 (Reuters)—Le Duc Tho, North Vietnam's chief negotiator at the Paris peace talks, left here for Hanoi today after receiving assurances from Premier Chou En‐lai of China's firm support in the Vietnam conflict.
Henry A. Kissinger's an nouncement that the Vietnam peace talks had failed to reach “a just and fair agree ment” has raised many unanswered questions. An article attempting to answer some appears on Page 3.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 18 (Reuters)— The South Vietnamese Govern ment said today that the failure of the secret Paris talks was evidence of Communist perfidy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 18 (AP) — The Saigon command reported yes terday that South Vietnamese paratroopers, backed by air strikes and artillery, killed 151 enemy soldiers in two days of fighting as they extended their control around Fire Base Anne eight miles southwest of Quang Tri city.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 17—The negative turn in the Paris peace negotiations provoked a com mon reaction of disappointment among Senators today, but it was still unclear whether the disappointment would lead to renewed criticism of the Ad ministration's Vietnam policies.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 17 — The White House announced today that Henry A. Kissinger's deputy, Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., was flying to South east Asia to brief the leaders of South Vietnam, Laos, Cam bodia and Thailand on the current impasse at the Paris negotiations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 17—The war damage in South Vietnam that is most noticeable and will take long est to repair is not the millions of bomb craters and defoliated acres of jungle, but the effect on cities—most especially this city, the capital.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 17— The White House announced today that Henry A. Kissinger's deputy, Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., was flying to South east Asia to brief the leaders of South Vietnam, Laos, Cam bodia and Thailand on the current impasse at the Paris negotiations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 18—North Viet nam accused the United States today of resuming the air war north of the 20th Parallel with a heavy raid around Haiphong.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 17— President Nixon is considering a number of diplomatic and military measures designed to put pressure on North Viet nam to reach an early cease fire agreement, well‐placed Ad ministration officials declared today.
Henry A. Kissinger's an nouncement that the Vietnam peace talks had failed to reach “a just and fair agree ment” has raised, many unanswered questions. An article attempting to answer some appears on Page 3.
The patients in the pediatrics ward of a large East Side hos pital received a visit yester day from Cardinal Cooke, who celebrated a special mass, and a message of good cheer from the President of the United States.
ROME, Dec. 17—Pope Paul VI voiced sadness and bitter ness today over the fact that “peace is not yet mature” in Indochina.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Mon day, Dec. 18 (Agence France Presse) — The official North Vietnamese party, newspaper to day blamed Washington for failure of the private talks in Paris between the United States and North Vietnam.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 18 (Reuters)—Cambodian planes have bombed suspected concentrations of Vietnamese Communist troops within 16 miles of Phnom Penh, a mili tary command spokesman said today. He said T‐28, fighter‐ bombers struck last night and this morning, mainly against targets 12 miles northeast of the capital.
PARIS, Dec. 18—The Viet namese Communist delegations indicated tonight that remain ing private contacts with the Americans in Paris may be broken off now, that bombing of the North has resumed.
The best hope for peace in Indochina since 1954 hes been severely shaken by a hail of American bombs on Haiphong and the outskirts of Hanoi in a turn from negotiation once again to confrontation. Whatever else the resumed bombing of North Vietnam above the 20th Parallel may accomplish, it is not likely to hasten— and could indefinitely postpone—the “just and fair” agreement that Henry Kissinger has said is the Presi dent's objective.
Wall Street reacted yester day with words of caution in response to the disclosure of breakdown in the Vietnam peace talks and the subsequent sell‐off in the stock market.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 19 — American B‐52's bombed the northeast suburbs of Hanoi last night for the first time while fighter‐ bombers carried out an all‐ night raid—the heaviest and longest yet—against the city, it was announced.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 18— The Nixon Administratiod in nounced a resumption of full scale bombing and mining of North Vietnam today, and the White House warned that Such raids “will continue until such time as a settlement is arrifed at.”
By their own wards, President Nixon and Mr. Kissin ger were either deceptive or naive in their pre‐election assurances to the American people about the imminence of peace in Vietnam. This is the sorry conclusion from the White House negotiator's remarkable briefing last Saturday.
Chancellor Willy Brandt of West Germany celebrated his 59th birthday in Bonn. Help ing Mr. Brandt celebrate were the Dilsseldorf Male Choir and Vice Chancellor Walter Scheel. With a touch of humor, Mr. Scheel gave Mr. Brandt a coin minted during the 19‐year joint rule in the 17th century of Dukes Ru dolf August and Anton Ulrich. The coin bore the motto “Duobus Fulcris Secu rius,” which can he trans lated to “It is surer to rule on the basis of two.” Mr. Scheel also joined the choir as it sang “When the Lilacs Blossom Again” for Mr. Brandt. The gift from the head of Mr. Brandt's politi cal opposition, Rainer Barzel, seemed simpler: 59 roses.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Tues day, Dec. 19 — The Hanoi re gion was attacked by nine waves of United States bombers during the night.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday Dec. 19 (Reuters)— President Nixon's deputy na tional‐security adviser, Gen. Aleicaridei M. Haig Jr., ar rived in Saigon today for talks with President Nguyen Van Thieu, a United States Embassy spokesman reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 19 (AP) — Hun dreds—of United States war‐ planes, including B‐52 heavy bombers, resumed attacks last night above the 20th Parallel of North Vietnam. United States officials said the planes made the heaviest raids of the war against the Hanoi ‐ Haiphong area.
Prices on the American Stock Exchange and in the over‐the counter market closed sharply lower yesterday as trading de clined.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 19 (AP)— Heavy fighting was reported yesterday for the third day in the north ernmost part of SOuth. Vietnam near Quang Tri city.
GENEVA, Dec. 18—Oiof Stroh, secretary general of the Swedish Red Cross, will have over‐all charge of the relief operations that the interna tional Red Cross is planning across Indochina should a cease‐ fire end military operations, it was announced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 18 (Reuters) — American troops strength in Vietnam dropped by 300 men last week to 24,900, the United States Command re ported today. A command spokeman said that the depart ing troops were soldiers and air men.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 18 — The Nixon Administration an nounced a resumption of full‐ schle bombing and mining of North Vietnam today, and the White House warned that such raids “will continue until such time as a settlement is arrived at.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 18 (Reuters) — United States sources here reported today that North Vietnamese forces staged a rocket and infantry attack on the southern Laotian provincial capital of Saravane yesterday. But, they said, the attack was repulsed. No casu alty figures were available.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 19 (AP) — Hun dreds of United States war planes, including B‐52 heavy bombers, resumed attacks last night above the 20th Parallel of North Vietnam. United States officials said the planes made the heaviest raids of the war against the Hanoi ‐ Haiphong area.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 18 (Reuters) — United States sources here reported today that North Vietnamese forces staged a rocket and infantry attack on the southern Laotian provincial capital of Saravane yesterday. But, they said, the attack was repulsed. No casu alty figures were available.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 19 (Reuters)— President Nixon's deputy na tional‐security adviser, Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., ar rived in Saigon today for talks with President Nguyen Van Thieu, a United States Embassy spokesman reported.
The United States pulled 300 troops out of South Vietnam last week, low ering its strength there to 24,900, the smallest total since February 1965. Those with long memories and ironic minds will recall that February 1965 was the month when President John son began the bombing of North Viet nam in an effort to force the Hanoi Government to agree to American terms in the lethal dispute over the future of Indochina.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 18 (AP)—A House subcommittee says the unauthorized Amer‐ ican air strikes ordered by Gen. John D. Lavelle against North Vietnam last winter “were not only proper but es sential.”

YORK, Pa., Dec. 18 (AP)— Five antiwar activists were ar rested by the state police today for allegedly sabotaging rail road equipment near a factory that makes bomb casings used in the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 19 (AP) — Heavy fighting was reported yesterday for the third day in the north ernmost part of South Vietnam near Quang Tri city.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 18 (Reuters) — American troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 300 men last week to 24,900, the United States command re ported today. A command spokeman said that the depart ing troops were soldiers and air men.

PARIS, Dec. 19—North Viet nam's envoy placed “full re sponsibility” on the United States today for failure to reach a cease‐fire after almost a month of intense negotiations, but he carefully avoided saying there had been a rupture in the talks.
PARIS, Dec. 19—North Viet nam's envoy placed “full re sponsibility” on the United States today for failure to reach a cease‐fire after almost a month of intense negotiations, but he carefully avoided saying there had been a rupture in the talks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 19—Henry A. Kissinger's deputy, Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., conferred with the leaders of South Vietnam and Cambodia today, with the an nounced purpose of explaining the state of the peace talks. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 19. (Reuters)—The White House, Itook issue today with the statement by Xuan Thuy, chief of the North Vietnamese dele gation in Paris, that the United States had insisted on introduc ing 126 modifications to the tentative cease‐fire accord of Oct. 20. 
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 19—General Haig met with President Lon Nol today to bring him up to date on the impasse in the Vietnam nego tiations and presumably to reaf firm Washington's support and encouragement for Cambodia's struggle against North Vietna mese and local insurgent troops. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 19—In the aftermath of the break down of the Paris negotiations, and the renewed bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong, some diplomats, officials and news men are wondering aloud whether any possible strains have developed between Presi dent Nixon and his chief nego tiator and foreign policy ad viser, Henry A, Kissinger. The speculation is based on both rea sonable deduc lions and inlangi ble evidence. The rumors have been magnified by the current con fusion in Washington about almost everything dealing with Vietnam. Despite Mr. Kissin ger's news conference on Saturday, there is uncertainty about the reasons for the col lapse of the Paris talks, and the brief White House an nouncement yesterday about the bombing fell short of an explanation of why it was or dered.
The breakdown in the Viet nam peace talks announced on Saturday continued to have a depressing effect on prices on the American Stock Exchange and in the over‐the‐counter market yesterday.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 19—North Vietnam accused the United States today of premedi tated intensification of the Viet nam war and termed the action insane. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 20—Two B‐52 heavy bombers and an F‐111 swing‐wing fighter‐bomber have been lost since the United States resumed full‐scale bomb ing of North Vietnam Monday, an American military spokes man said last night.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Dec. 19—The 27th annual ses sion of the General Assembly ended tonight with a mixed sense of accomplishment and failure. 
TOKYO, Dec. 19 (AP)— China's Acting President, Tung Pi‐wu, and Premier Chou En lai have promised the Vietcong that “so long as the United States does not stop its war of aggression, the Chinese people will, as always, resolutely sup port and assist the just struggle of the Vietnamese people.” 
MOSCOW, Dec. 19—The Soviet Government today de nounced the resumption of wide‐scale United States air raids over North Vietnam and said it was giving the develop ing situation its “most serious consideration.” 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 19 (Agence France‐Presse)—Six United States airmen, sonic of whom were said to be crew, members of a B‐52 bomber, were presented to the press here today. They were said to have been captured last night. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 19 (Agence France‐Presse)—Six United States airmen, some of whom were said to be crew members of a B‐52 bomber, were presented to the press here today. They were said to have been captured last night. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 19—The United States bombs that fell on Hanoi and Haiphong today brought gloom to many American officials here and jubilation to members of the South Vietnamese Govern ment. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 19— The White House said today that it expected low‐level tech nical talks on details of a set tlement in Vietnam to continue as scheduled this week in Paris despite the resumption of full scale bombing and mining of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 20 — Three heavy B‐52 bombers and two smaller fighter‐bombers have been lost since the United States resumed full‐scale bomb ing and mining of North Viet nam Monday evening, an Amer ican military spokesman said today. 
PRINCETON, N.J., Dec. 19— A group of 11 students and fac ulty members of the Princeton Theological Seminary today es tablished a defense fund for five antiwar activists arrested yesterday for allegedly sabotag ing railroad equipment outside a defense plant in York, Pa. 
The stock market sustained a second—and more modest— decline yesterday in the wake of the breakdown in Vietnam peace talks made public by American officials over the weekend.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 19—In the aftermath of the break down of the Paris negotiations, and the renewed bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong, some diplomats, officials and news men are wondering aloud whether any possible strains have developed between Presi dent Nixon and his chief nego tiator and foreign policy ad viser, Henry A. Kissinger. The speculation is based on both rea sonable deduc tions and intangi ble evidence. The rumors have been magnified by the current con fusion in Washington about almost everything dealing with Vietnam. Despite Mr. Kissin ger's news conference on Saturday, there is uncertainty about the reasons for the col lapse of the Paris talks, and the brief White House an nouncement yesterday about the bombing fell short of an explanation of why it was or dered.
SAIGON, Wednesday, Dec. 20 (AP)—The Hanoi radio said to day that three American war ships were “set ablaze” Sunday night off the port city of Thanh, Hoa. 
MOSCOW, Dec. 19—The Soviet Government today de nounced the resumption of wide‐scale United States air raids over North Vietnam and said it was giving the develop ing situation its “most serious consideration.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 19—The United States bombs that fell on Hanoi and Haiphong today brought gloom to many American officials here and jubilation to members of the South Vietnamese Govern ment. 
The Soviet Union denounced the resumption of heavy American bombing of North Vietnam but did so in statement whose tone appeared to reflect embarrassment among Soviet leaders at the latest turn of events. The statement, by Tass, the official press agency, said that the Soviet people demanded that the raids be halted promptly and that an agreement be quickly signed end the war. [Page 14.] 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 19—North Vietnam accused the United States today of premedi tated intensification of the Viet nam war and termed the action insane. 
With the opportunity safely to disengage American military personnel and prisoners from the Vietnamese conflict now rapidly receding, President Nixon has resort ed once more to naked force to try to obtain his own larger objectives in Southeast Asia—objectives which are neither realistic nor essential to this country's secu rity interests. However much Hanoi may be responsible for disrupting the negotiations—which is a highly dis puted point—civilized man will be horrified at the re newed spectacle of the world's mightiest air force merci lessly pounding a small Asian nation in an abuse national power and disregard of humanitarian principles. 
PARIS, Dec. 19—The Soviet Ambassador to France, de nouncing the renewed bombing, today questioned the sincerity of American peace pledges de livered during President Nix on's visit to Moscow in the spring. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 19 (Reuters)—The White House took issue today with the statement by Xuan Thuy, chief of the North Vietnamese dele gation in Paris that the United States had insisted on introduc ing 126 modifications to the tentative cease‐fire accord of Oct. 20. 
TOKYO, Dec. 19 (AP) — China's Acting President, Tung Pi‐wu, and Premier Chou En lai have promised the Vietcong that “so long as the United States does not stop its war of aggression, the Chinese people will, as always, resolutely sup port and assist the just struggle of the Vietnamese people.” 
PARIS, Dec. 20 — North Vi etnam today announced the “postponement” of further talks here with the United States on technical details of a Vietnam cease‐fire. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 21—Official South Vietnamese sources said today that President Nixon had urged both North Vietnam and South Vietnam to make con cessions toward a peace settle ment. 
The stock market has registered its disappointment at fading hopes for an early peace settlement in Vietnam. In three days the Dow‐Jones industrial average has dropped more than 22 points, and now threatens to under the 1,000 mark it attained soon after President Nixon's re‐election.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 20— General Haig spent an hour and 15 minutes with the Laotian Premier, Prince Souvanna Phou ma, today, briefing him on the impasse in the Paris peace negotiations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 20 (AP) — The Hanoi radio reported today that 215 persons were killed and 325 were wounded in the North Vi etnamese capital in raids on Monday and yesterday. In Hai phong, it added, 45 persons were killed and 131 wounded on Monday. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 20 (AP) —The Republican leader of the Senate said today that Presi dent Nixon's bombing decision should be supported, but his Democratic counterpart said that it would only prolong the war.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 20—The Defense Department said today that the intensive American bombing of North Vietnam in the last two clays had caused “very significant damage” to a broad range of military targets. 
A Vietnam veteran who had been confined for mental illness shot and wounded two Federal security officers yes terday at Kennedy Interna tional Airport before being captured, the police said. De tails on Page 70. 
Stock prices continued to decline yesterday in reaction to stalemated peace efforts and a resumption of full‐scale bombing and mining of North Vietnam. Statistically, the market was a virtual replay of Tuesday's performance. The Dow‐Jones industrial average slipped 4.36 points to 1,004.82 and declines outpaced ad vances on the New York Stock Exchange by a 9‐to‐5 ratio.
LONDON, Dec. 20 (AP)— President Nixon's bombing de cision produced criticism today in much of Europe and espe cially in the Nordic countries. In Finland, where criticism of United States policies in Vietnam has been muted in the past, Foreign Minister Ahti Karjalainen declared: “It is es pecially difficult to understand on what arguments the vast bombardment of the North Vietnamese territory has been based.”
WARSAW, Dec. 20 (Reuters) —A Polish freighter was sunk and three Polish seamen were killed in an American bombing attack on the North Vietnamese port of Haiphong today, the Polish press agency reported. 
ROME, Dec. 20—Pope Paul VI today deplored the resumption of United States bombing deep in North Vietnam and called for patient negotiations to seek peace. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Doc. 21—Official South Vietnamese sources said today that President Nixon had urged both North Vietnam and South Vietnam to make con cessions toward a peace settle ment. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 20—The Defense Department said today that the intensive American bombing of North Vietnam in the last two days had caused “very significant damage” to a broad range of military targets.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 21—A United States military spokesman dis closed this morning that a fourth B‐52 Stratofortress was struck by antiaircraft fire and crashed late last night as what is believed to be the heaviest bombing of the war apparently continued in North Vietnam. 
As waves of American planes continued to sweep over North Vietnam, new protests were voiced in many parts of the world yesterday against Presi dent Nixon“s decision to re sume the heavy attacks, but there were also some expres sions of support. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 21 (UPI) — Heavy ground fighting was re ported yesterday on South Viet nam's northernmost front, with two battles fought near Quang Tri city. 
SYDNEY, Australia, Dec. 20 —The last Australian troops in Vietnam came home today to muted welcome, ending a 10‐ year commitment that had divided the nation. 
Special to The New York TimesPHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 20—The Cambodian Gov ernment today endorsed the re sumption of full‐scale bombing of North Vietnam by the United States as a necessary step to force Hanoi to adopt a more conciliatory attitude at the negotiating table. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 20 (AP)—General Haig arrived. in Bangkok from Vientiane to day.
A Vietnam veteran who had twice fled Rockland State Hos pital after confinement for men tal illness shot and wounded two Federal security officers at Kennedy International Air port yesterday with a gun grabbed from one of the guards, the police reported. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 20—Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. met for half an hour today with President Nguyen Van Thieu. It was General Haig's second meeting with Mr. Thieu since he arrived here yes terday.
MOSCOW, Dec. 20—The So viet Union reiterated today its call for a speedy signing by Washington of the cease‐fire accord negotiated in Paris last October. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 20 — Administration officials insisted today that North Vietnam was entirely to blame for the break down in the Vietnam talks and said that the United States had resumed heavy bombing be cause of Hanoi's lack of “seri ousness” at the Paris negotiations. 
A Vietnam veteran who had been confined for mental illness shot and wounded two Federal security officers yes terday at Kennedy Interna tional Airport before being captured, the police said. De tails on Page 70. 
PEKING, Dec. 20—China ac cused the United States today of having committed “a new barbarous crime” with its in tensified bombing of North Vietnam and declared that it would never succeed in impos ing peace terms unacceptable to Hanoi. 
Situated 60 miles southeast of Hanoi on the Cua Cam, an arm of the Thai Binh River, which flows into the Gulf of Tonkin, Haiphong is the principal port of North Vietnam and as such a target of vital importance. 
Hanoi, which stands beside the Red River, is a port, railroad and industrial center whose population has in creased from 120,000 to about 500,000 in 30 years. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 21 (AP) — North Vietnam said tonight that it would not he intimidated by a reported ulti matum from President Nixon to sign a peace agreement or face continued heavy air and naval attacks.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 21 (AP) —The House Democratic cau cus will he asked at its Jan. 2 meeting before the opening of the new Congress to go on record against the renewed bombing of North Vietnam, it was announced today. 
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 21 (Reuters)—The Cam bodian command said today that. North Vietnamese forces began an all‐out attack last night on Kompong Thom, the provincial capital 77 miles north of here that has been under siege since Dec. 7. 
MOSCOW, Dec. 21—Fol lowing, in official translation, are excerpts front an address by Leonid I. Brezhnev, the So viet Communist party leader, at a celebration in the Kremlin Hall of Congresses today in honor of the 50th anniversary of the formation of the Soviet Union: 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 21 (AP)—The United States command announced today that one American was killed in ac tion and six were wounded in Indochina last week. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Dec. 22 (AP)—Major fight ing reportedly continued yes terday in the northernmost part of South Vietnam, but elsewhere in the country, ac tion on the ground was said to he at a low level. 
PARIS—There was a time not very long ago when one Guernica, while not actually provoking an offensive against barbarity, caused nausea in the West when the West discovered it was capable of the worst against mankind. It was already a case of air planes massacring a civilian popula tion, a case of airplanes dispatched by a foreign power to support dic tatorship. 
MOSCOW, Dec. 21—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communist party leader, condemning the renewed American air war against Hanoi and Haiphong, declared today that the future development of Soviet‐Ameri can relations hinged largely on what happened on the issue of ending the Vietnam war.
A thousand demonstrators protesting against the renewed bombing of North Vietnam poured into Times Square last night and disrupted traffic in termittently for nearly two hours. 
The over‐the‐counter market and the American Stock Ex change posted their fourth con secutive losing day yesterday in active trading. 
HONG KONG, Friday, Dec. 22 —China charged today that a Chinese merchant vessel was struck and damaged by United States planes bombing Hai phong yesterday and issued a strong protest over the incident. 
News Analysis
MOSCOW, Dec. 21—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communist party leader, condemning the renewed American air war against Hanoi and Haiphong, declared today that the future development of Soviet‐Ameri can relations hinged largely on what happened on the issue of ending the Vietnam war.
MOSCOW, Friday, Dec. 22— Official North Vietnamese fig ures put the casualty toll from American air raids around Hanoi at 215 dead and 326 wounded through noon Tues day, according to Tass, the Soviet press agency. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 21 — Congressional sources close to the Senate Armed Services Committee said today that they had been informed by Pentagon officials that a total of 13 B‐52's had been lost thus far in the current series of raids against North Vietnam. 
It was a wide‐ranging speech that Leonid I. Brezhnev delivered yesterday to mark the fiftieth birthday of the formation of the Soviet Union as the world now knows it. Kremlinologists will note that Mr. Brezhnev chose to hold the celebration nine days early, on Stalin's birthday. 
PARIS—It is with dismay that we read that most Americans think that the war in Vietnam is almost over and that Mr. Nixon is making every effort for peace. Our daily news from Viet nam tells of suffering at its worst in ten years, yet the human reality of the war continues to be ignored not only by governments and war‐makers, but by most men and women in the United States. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Dec. 22—A United States spokesman said today that four more B‐52 heavy bombers were shot down near Hanoi yester day, raising to eight the num ber lost since Monday. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 21 (Agence France Presse) — Twelve captured American pilots last night at tended a special Christmas service held by a visiting Yale University theologian and fea turing Joan Baez, the folk singer and antiwar activist. 
PARIS, Dec. 21—The North Vietnamese and Vietcong dele gates walked out of the formal Paris conference today to pro test the intensive United States bombing. But they called for another regular meeting next Thursday. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Dec. 22—A United States spokesman said today that four more B‐52 heavy bombers were shot down near Hanoi yester day, raising to eight the num ber lost since Monday. 
PARIS, Dec. 21—The North Vietnamese and Vietcong dele gates walked out of the formal Paris conference today to pro test the intensive United States bombing. But they called for another regular meeting next Thursday. 
The stalemated peace in Vietnam continued to cast its shadow over Wall Street yes terday as the Dow‐Jones in dustrial average slipped 4.82 to close at an even 1,000. 
Asked whether civilian centers would not inevitably be hit during the resumed massive air assault on North Vietnam, a Pentagon spokesman replied: “No. We don't strike civilian targets.” He then amended his comment to say: “We do not target civilian targets.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 21 (UPI)—Informed sources said today that Government troops, supported by AC‐47 gunships, repelled a North Vietnamese at tack last night on positions half a mile south of the southern Laotian town of Saravane. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 21 (Reuters) — Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., President Nixon's en voy, today met with the Thai Premier, Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn, and other Thai leaders and explained develop ments in the recent negoti ations between the United States and North Vietnam. 
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Dec. 21 (UPI) — The President's personal envoy, Gen. Alexan der M. Haig Jr., carried a let ter from Mr. Nixon to Presi dent Nguyen Van Thieu the White House confirmed today, declining to disclose its con tents.
LONDON, Dec. 22—When the Lord told Abraham that He was going to destroy Sodom for its sins, as it is said in Genesis, Chapter 18, Abraham asked, “Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?” The Lord agreed that if there were ten righteous men In Sodom, “then I will spare all the place for their sakes.” But there were not ten. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Dec. 23—As the United States continued its heavy bombing of North Viet nam today for the sixth day, the officially reported losses of American planes and crewmen mounted still higher. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22—The White House said today that the United States would con tinue its heavy bombing of North Vietnam and that the next step to end the Vietnam war was “totally” up to the North Vietnamese. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22— Forty‐one religious leaders in the United States have issued a pastoral letter assailing United States bombing of North Viet nam, it was announced today. 
STOCKHOLM, Dec. 22—Ha noi's largest hospital, one mile west of the city center, was damaged by American planes early today, according to the Swedish Foreign Ministry. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 22— As part of a recently initiated campaign by the United States and Laotian Governments to crack down on narcotics traf fic in and through Laos, Pre mier Souvanna Phouma and the American Ambassador opened a new addict detoxifica tion center here today. 
NEW DELHI, Dec. 22 (Reuters) — Indian diplomatic quarters in Hanoi were dam aged by American bombing yes terday and India has delivered a strong protest to the United States, parliament was told to day. 
Scattered protests, expres sions of outrage and signs of a reanimated antiwar movement have surfaced here and in cities across the country this week in response to the renewed American bombing of North Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Dec. 23 — As the United States continued its heavy bombing of North Viet nam today for the sixth clay, the officially reported losses of American B‐52 bombers rose to 10 and the number of missing airmen rose to at least 55. 
SAIGON, Saturday, Dec. 23 (UPI) — The Hanoi radio gave the names today of five more Americans it said had been cap tured after bombing raids over North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22—The White House said today that the United States would con tinue its heavy bombing of North Vietnam and that the next step to end the Vietnam war was “totally” up to the North Vietnamese. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Dec. 23 (AP)—The South Vietnamese Government today announced a 24‐hour cease‐fire for Christmas. 
ROME, Dec. 22 — Pope Paul VI said today that the reasons for the break in the Vietnam peace talks were not “suffi ciently apparent.” 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22— Forty‐one religious leaders in the United States have issued a, pastoral letter assailing United States bombing of North Viet nam, it was announced today. 
MOSCOW, Dec. 22 (Reuters) —Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, the chief Vietcong delegate to the four‐party peace talks at Paris, charged today that the United States was demanding revision of major points in the tentative cease‐fire agreement reached with North Vietnam. 
ROME, Dec. 22 —Pope Paul VI said today that the reasons for the break in the Vietnam peace talks were not “suffi ciently apparent.” 
HONG KONG, Dec. 22 (Reu ters)—North Vietnam said to day that American bombing had not disrupted the normal life of Hanoi.
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 22 (Reuters)—The Cam bodian command said today that an unspecified number of its troops began an operation with South Vietnamese troops yesterday, with the aim of clear ing a Communist‐occupied area of Cambodia 55 miles south of here. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 22—Gen, Vo Nguyen Giap, North Vietnam's Defense Min ister and leading military stra tegist, has declared that Hanoi and Haiphong may be “erased” by United States bombs, but that in the end the North Viet namese will win the war. 
WASHINGTON—This was to have been the week when Henry A. Kis singer's peace pledge of Oct. 26 would be translated into agreement, making Christmas truly joyous for all those in this country and the world who direct ly or indirectly have borne the burdens of the Vietnam war. Instead, Wash ington this Christmas was steeped in gloom. Even the official Government spokesmen did not seem to have their hearts in their work. For instead of peace they could only project more war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Dec. 24—Heavy Amer ican bombing of North Vietnam continued for a seventh day to day while the United States military command drew even tighter its curtain of secrecy over the operation.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 23— A flight that was to have brought Soviet Cosmonaut Ger man Titov to Hanoi and to have departed with four Americans who have been there for the past week has been postponed.
In the same week that American astronauts fired their spacecraft home from the moon, American pilots fired bombs that broke through the heavens over a peasant nation in Asia. America the ingenious and America the vengeful had both struck.
The “ears” of the jungle are a sophisticated network of sen sors designed by the American forces to pick up the sounds of truck convoys on the Ho Chi Minh Trail. But the foreign devils have reckoned without the resourcefulness of “Aunt” Ngha, the intelligence chief for Uncle Ho, President of the Democratic Republic of North Vietnam.
To the Editor:
The issue generates strong emotions across the country. How, some ask, can amnesty be offered to those who fled when others fought? But, others assert, how can amnesty not be offered to those who were right about the war before the rest of us?
WASHINGTON, Dec. 23—The State Department has recom mended the virtual elimination of the Defense Department's role in pacification efforts in South Vietnam.
LONDON, Dec. 23—Western Europe is reacting to the Amer ican bombing of North Vietnam with growing protests and a mixture of sadness, disgust and anger.
THE GLOOM and uncertainty lately created by the stalemate in the Vietnam peace negotiations and the sudden resumption of heavy American bombing in southeast Asia have marred what could have been a truly joyous season in the business and economic world.

MOSCOW, Dec. 23 (AP)— Tass, the Soviet press agency, reported from Hanoi today that American air strikes over the North Vietnamese capital had inflicted casualties on Ameri can pilots held prisoner there.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 23—Air Force officials believe that the aging B‐52 has, in the last few days, redeemed its role as a strategic bomber capable of penetrating the Soviet Union.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Dec. 23 (Reuters) — Secretary General Waldheim said today that he was greatly concerned at the continued United States bombing of North Vietnam.
Xuan Thuy, head of the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace talks, said in an interview last week that before the negotiations broke down Henry A. Kissinger had raised in the private talks all the public demands made by President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam, the American Broadcasting Company reported last night.
SAIGON—“During the 24 hour pe riod ending at 0800 today, U.S. crews conducted bombing operations against military targets in North Viet nam.” With that bland announcement, the American command last week launched the heaviest air attacks of the entire war against the North.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 23 (Reuters) — John and Gigi are two children of mixed parentage in one of South Viet nam's numerous overcrowded orphanages.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 23— Military sources reported today that North Vietnamese troops backed by tanks had captured an important bridgehead in southern Laos only 15 miles from the Thai border.
The stock market nosedived last week in a decisive reaction to Henry A. Kissinger's disclosure of a break down in the Vietnam peace negotiations. Heavy selling moved in Monday and continued until Friday.
SAIGON, Dec. 23—American intelligence officials denied any knowledge today of a report by some South Vietnamese in telligence sources that General Vo Nguyen Giap, the North Vietnamese Defense Minister, had been killed in the Hanoi Haiphong area.
WASHINGTON — America's peace was at hand. Peace still is at hand but it is not being grasped.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 23—The North Vietnamese Vice Minister of Health said tonight that 25 doctors, pharmacists and male and female nurses had been killed at Bach Mai Hospital during American bomb ing raids on Hanoi in the last few days.
To the Editor:
PARIS, Dec. 23—A meeting of delegates who are assigned to discuss technical aspects of the Vietnam peace negotiations was adjourned abruptly today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 23 (AP)—The Hanoi radio said today that the American De fense Department spokesman, Jerry W. Friedheim, was lying when he said that American bombers were not targeting any areas in which the Penta gon believed that United States prisoners of war were being held.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 23—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam reiterated today his Gov ernment's demand that all North Vietnamese troops must be withdrawn from South Vietnam before a peace accord would be acceptable to Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 24 — Bob Hope, a substitute Santa for two decades of G.I.'s, gave what he said was his last annual Christmas show in Viet nam today, adding that he had originally thought that he might be able to perform it in Hanoi for American prisoners. 
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Dec. 24 (UPI)—President Nixon ig nored antiwar demonstrators outside his vacation home today and settled down for a quiet holiday with his wife. 
LONDON, Dec. 24—The only bless ing we can really hope for on Christ mas is self‐perception. Miracles are not to be expected: only the chance of seizing on the symbol of Christmas to look within and see who we are. That was what the Spirits did for Scrooge in done night. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 25—Informed American military officers said this morning that the United States had at least temporarily halted the bombing of North Vietnam.
The following dispatch, which was delayed in trans mission, was written by Telford Taylor, professor of law at Columbia University, who is visiting Hanoi with group of Americans. Mr. Taylor, a retired brigadier gen eral, was chief prosecutor at the Nuremberg war crimes trials and is the author of several books, including “Nurem berg and Vietnam: An American Tragedy.”
WASHINGTON, Dec. 24 — Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's negotiator at the regular Paris talks on Vietnam, said in an interview made public today, that his Government would not resume negotiations with the United States as long as the Nixon Administration con tinued bombing north of the 20th Parallel.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 24 — For several hours this evening vehicular traffic was barred in the heart of Saigon as thousands of resi dents—young couples, fami lies with small children and swarms of teen‐age boys — strolled through the streets in their best clothes. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 25—Informed Anterican military officers said this morning that the United States had at least temporarily halted the bombing of North Vietnam. 
In city towers and shabby tenements, in light‐strung sub urban homes and in prisons, hospitals and churches across the metropolitan area, families and friends gathered on an overcast eve of Christmas last night to exchange gifts and thoughts of goodwill.
3 Killed When Car Overturns
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 24 (UPI) — President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered the release of 93 convicts and commuted the sentences of 137 others in his annual Christmas clemency, message today, the Govern ment announced. None granted clemency were political pris oners. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 24 — Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's negotiator at the regular. Paris talks on Vietnam, said in an interview made public today that his Government would not resume negotiations with the United States as long as the Nixon Administration con tinued bombing north of the 20th Parallel. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 26 — Informed American military officers said early today that the pause in bombing of North Vietnam that began on Christmas eve re mained in effect past midnight. They added that they had re ceived no indication of when the air raids might be resumed.
HAMLET, N. C., Dec. 25—The bar baric bombing we Americans are in ??ting on a faraway nation of Asia does not echo loudly here in this small Southern town, where few see the Eastern liberal press that President. Nixon so disdains. Television news on the local channel provides more of the natural devastation in Managua than of the American‐made havoc in Hanoi. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 26 — United States bombers resumed at tacks in North Vietnam above the 20th Parallel this afternoon after a 36‐hour suspension of strikes for Christmas, the United States command an nounced. 
LONDON, Dec. 25 (AP)— Two hundred legislators, cler ics, union leaders and actors lined the pavements outside the American Embassy in London today in silent protest against the renewed bombing. 
BERLIN, Dec. 25 (UN) — Several hundred demonstrators shouting “Nixon murderer” marched down the Kurfürsten damm, West Berlin's main street, today to protest United States policy in Vietnam. A police spokesman said five persons had been arrested for carrying stones. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 25 (UPI) —Chanting “Stop the bomb ing, Lord,” about 200 people took Christmas communion in an interfaith service for peace today across the street from the White House. 
LONG BEACH, Calif., Dec. 25 (UPI)—About 500 relatives and friends and one Santa Claus were on hand in the morning fog today to offer a holiday greeting to the men of the attack carrier U.S.S. Oki nawa, returning from a nine‐ month tour in the Western Pa cific and off Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 26 — Informed American military officers said early today that the pause in bombing of North Vietnam that began on Christmas Eve re mained in effect past midnight. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 25 (UPI) — American military strength in Vietnam declined to 24.200 last week, a drop of 700 men from the previous week and the lowest total in almost eight years, the United States command said today. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 25— The resumption of sustained bombing by the United States throughout North Vietnam has revived the debate here and abroad over the efficacy of the bombing strategy. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 25 (Agence France‐Presse) — The North Vietnamese press agency reported today that American planes killed or wounded thousands in the Hanoi and Haiphong raids be tween Dec. 18 and Dec. 24 and that 40,000 tons of bombs were dropped on North Vietnam. 
MOUNTAIN LAKES, N. J., Dec. 25 (AP)—The home of Harry L. Sears, the New Jersey campaign chairman for Mr. Nixon, was picketed here this morning by about 75 Morris County peace activists. 
SAIGON, Dec. 25 (AP)—The South Vietnamese command to day reported 58 violations dur ing overlapping 24‐hour cease fires set by the Vietcong and the Saigon Government. Each side blamed the other for the violations. 
Gus Hall, general secretary of the Communist Party, U.S.A., said yesterday that President Nixon was “guilty of political treachery without precedent” and “never intended to sign” the Vietnam peace agreement. The President's adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, added to Mr. Nix on's “swindle,” Mr. Hall de clared, when he said the North Vietnamese “wanted to change the agreement,” The Associated Press reported.
Premier Fidel Castro of Cuba made one of his rare, as far as is known, toboggan rides. It happened in the snows of Gander, Newfound land, while the plane taking the Premier home from Mos cow was refueling. The Pre mier laughed as he fell off the toboggan. And, judging from photographs of the event, some of those in the area of the fall laughed, too. There was no indication whether Mr. Castro had any snow fun in Moscow, which he had just visited for the second time in 1972.
PARIS, Dec. 26—North Viet nam denounced today the re sumption of American bombing of Hanoi but indicated it was willing to resume negotiation if the attacks halted. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 26— A. flight to and from Hanoi scheduled today by the three‐ nation International Control Commission was canceled at the last moment because of a radio communication from the con trol tower at Hanoi's Gia Lam Airport, saying it would be un safe to land. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 27—With its 36‐hour pause in the bombing of North Vietnam ended, the United States command said yesterday that the planes were once again operating as they had last week, when the raids were the heaviest of the war. 
WASHINGTON—In recent weeks President Nixon has had another op portunity to end the Indochina tragedy and accomplish the return of our pris oners of war — on a basis which would have had the support and praise of all Americans. But events suggest a return to the same old war. For we cannot read about the heavy bombing, the new targets, and the unprece dented loss of American pilots and planes, without a deep and despairing sense that peace is not at hand.
Economic Analysis
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 27—With its 36‐hour pause in the bombing of North Vietnam ended, the United States command said yesterday that the planes were once again operating as they had last week, when the raids were the heaviest of the war. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 26 (Agence France‐Presse)— American bombers tonight con ducted the most violent air at tack on Hanoi since the begin ning of the war.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26—A Pentagon spokesman said today the air war against Hanoi and Haiphong had resumed and “continues to be a very major effort.” 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26—President Nixon has sent the bombers over North Vietnam again, but it is hard to see how this air war can go on for long at the present rate. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26 (Reu ters)—The United States has strongly protested to Sweden over Premier Olof Palme's statement Saturday comparing the United States bombing of Hanoi to Nazi massacres in World War II, a State Depart ment spokesman said today. The Swedish Ambassador, Hu bert de Besche, was called to the department Saturday by Acting Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson and was given the oral protest.
SAIGON, Wednesday, Dec. 27 (UPI)—Communist gunners fired 35 rockets into the Ameri can‐Vietnamese air base at Da Nang and surrounding civilian areas just before dawn Monday. One American was slightly wounded and two Vietnamese civilians were killed. Five Amer ican helicopters were damaged or destroyed at the base, which is 370 miles north of Saigon. The attack was the first against the base since Dec. 3. 
America's bombs sear through North Vietnam's cities and countryside again, perhaps even touching some of the camps where a tragically increasing company of American war prisoners sit helplessly. After a brief obeisance to Christmas, the spirit of war has re‐emerged untempered. Does the muted popular outcry against the renewed massive bombardments indicate that the Admin istration's grievous policy is having a grievous conse quence here at home: the apathetic withdrawal of con cerned citizens and their representatives in Congress into a mood of hopelessness and resignation? It needn't and mustn't be. 
DACCA, Bangladesh, Dec. 26 (AP) — Students protesting against the bombing of North Vietnam set fire today to the United States Information Cen ter at Rajashahi, 90 miles north west of here, and caused con siderable damage. 
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Dec. 26 (AP)—The White House maintained silence on the re sumption of bombing attacks on North Vietnam today fol lowing the vain wait by Presi dent Nixon for a peace signal from Hanoi.
SINGAPORE, Dec. 27 (Reu ters)—About 100 demonstra tors gathered outside the United States Embassy here today to protest the resumed American bombing of North Vietnam. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 28 — The United States military com mand, breaking a nine‐day si lence on damage inflicted in the intensive American air attacks against North Vietnam, listed nearly three dozen airfields, rail yards, power plants, supply depots and communications centers yesterday among the facilities that have been bombed. 
To the Editor:
SYDNEY, Australia, Dec. 27 —Australia stopped military aid to South Vietnam today, ending the last vestige of this country's controversial partici pation in the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 27 (AP) — A South Viet namese F‐5 fighter‐bomber ac cidentally dropped a bomb in village 20 miles northeast of Saigon today, killing nine ci vilians and wounding 10, re ports from the area said. Six homes were reported destroyed.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 27. (Reu ters) — State Department offi cials were taken by surprise to day by the Australian Govern ment's decision to halt military aid to South Vietnam. 
WARSAW, Dec. 27 (AP) —A fourth Polish seaman has died in a Haiphong hospital as a result of injuries suffered in a United States air strike last week, the official Polish press agency said today. The Polish Government reported earlier that three Poles had been killed when their cargo ship, the Jo seph Conrad, was struck and sunk. 
WASHINGTON—One of the primary reasons this tragic war continues is because a majority of the Congress has consistently refused to confront the executive branch with obvious in consistencies in its various statements about Vietnam. 
The late Harry S. Truman, who was anything but a cry‐baby like the pres ent incumbent of the White House, is famous for having said that “if you can't stand the heat, you better get out of the kitchen.” He also observed, almost jovially, that “whenever the press quits abusing me, I know I'm in the wrong pew.” That was in the middle of the 1948 campaign and Mr. Truman knew better than most that while the editorial writers and column ists were mostly against him, the front‐page headlines that reflected his “give 'em hell” style were working for him. 
Despite the communiqué tardily issued in Saigon yes terday, the Nixon Administration continues to evade the toughest and most pertinent questions about the mas sive new United States air assault against North Vietnam. 
To the Editor:
SAN DIEGO, Dec. 27 — A black crewman of the aircraft carrier Kitty. Hawk testified at a Navy hearing today that he had seen white sailors knock down and beat the ship's executive officer during racial rioting aboard the carrier off the coast of Vietnam.
ROME, Dec. 27—Two leading Italian newspapers — Corriere Della Sera of Milan and Il Mes saggero of Rome—said today that Pope Paul VI was under stood to have sent a personal letter to President Nixon urging him to end the United States air strikes in North Vietnam. 
VIENNA, Dec. 27 (Reuters)— Demonstrators today daubed the entrance of a branch of the Bank of America here with red paint, protesting United States air raids on North Vietnam. 
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
DACCA, Bangladesh, Dec. 27 (UPI)—Students protesting the United States bombing of North Vietnam set fire to the United States Information Serv ice office and library in Raj shahi, 100 miles northwest of Dacca, it was reported today. 
To the Editor:
PARIS, Dec. 27—North Viet nam refused to sit down with the United States today to dis cuss technical details of cease‐fire agreement. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 28 — The United States military com mand, breaking a nine‐day si lence on damage inflicted in the intensive American air attacks against North Vietnam, listed nearly three dozen airfields, rail yards, power plants, supply depots and communications centers yesterday among the facilities that have been bombed. 
TEL AVIV, Israel, Dec. 27 (Reuters)—Harold Wilson, the leader of Britain's opposition Labor party, tonight condemned the American bombing of North Vietnam. Mr. Wilson is on a visit here. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 27 (Agence France‐Presse)—In the northern Hanoi district of An Duong, between the Red River and Lake Tay, an old metal drum is jammed in some rubble beside a hole 25 feet in diameter and six feet deep.
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, Dec. 27—Yugoslays angered by Unit ed States bombing of North Vietnam smeared red paint on the American Consulate in Zagreb last night and staged protest demonstrations outside the building today. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 27—Following is the text of a communique issued to day by the United States mili tary command, listing targets of American air raids in North Vietnam between Dec. 18 and Dec. 25 and assessing damage:
CHICAGO, Dec. 28 — A three‐judge Federal panel here has ruled that a law suspending Federal scholarship funds for students convicted of serious crimes is invalid because it is vague and “overbroad.” 
New York officials in the Federal, state and city govern ments yesterday honored Harry S. Truman at services in City Hall Plaza as, in Mayor Lind say's words, “a President who was both a leader and a lesson for all of us.” 
LONDON, Dec. 28—The gen eral public restraint shown by top British politicians toward the American bombardment of North Vietnam ended today with a bitter attack by the most restrained of the Labor party's leaders, Roy Jenkins. 
HELSINKI, Finland, Dec. 28 — Finland recognized North Vietnam today and eight of her nine political parties called on the United States to stop the bombing and to sign a peace treaty. Vietnam today and eight of her nine political parties called on the United States to stop the bombing and to sign a peace treaty.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Dec. 28—Yugoslavia and 15 Asian and African countries in a statement today expressed “deep concern” over the re sumption of American bombing of North Vietnam and the in terruption of the peace negotia tions in Paris.
As the aerial blitz against North Vietnam continues in full fury, the American people have been treated another sordid glimpse of what they are getting for the continuing high investment in lives, money and national honor throughout Indochina.
PEKING, Dec. 28 —Premier Chou En‐lai asked an Ameri can correspondent here tonight to let the American people know that the renewed bomb ing of North Vietnam would have an adverse effect on Chi na's relations with the United States. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 28—A Defense Department spokesman had no immediate comment to day on reports of additional ci vilian casualties from the bomb ing of North Vietnam. He re ferred instead to earlier state ments at Pentagon briefings. 
PEKING, Dec. 28 —Premier Chou En‐lai asked an Ameri can correspondent here tonight to let the American people know that the renewed bomb ing of North Vietnam would have an adverse effect on Chi na's relations with the United States. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 28— North Vietnam has undertaken an effort to convince Ameri cans and others that the Viet nam negotiations broke down in Paris not because of its re calcitrance, as charged by Washington, but because the United States made new de mands that reopened the entire scope of the negotiations. 
PEKING, Dec. 28 —Premier Chou En‐lai asked an Ameri can correspondent here tonight to let the American people know that the renewed bomb ing of North Vietnam would have an adverse effect on Chi na's relations with the United States. 
MOSCOW, Dec. 28—The of ficial Soviet media are main taining a drumfire of criticism against the heavy air assaults on North Vietnam. The theme is broken campaign promises to American voters over the war in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Dec. 29 (UPI)—Enemy gun ners fired 12 122‐mm. rockets, into a South Vietnamese train ing center on the edge of Da Nang yesterday afternoon, kill ing 3 persons and wounding 13 others.
WASHINGTON—Can we scientists meet in Washington and ignore the fact that our national Administration is launching from this city the Most massive air attacks in history? It is launching those attacks against con centrated centers of civilian popula tion, while blandly announcing lists of military targets that under these cir cumstances insult the intelligence of every thinking person. North Vietnam hardly contains military targets; and a B‐52 bombing pattern one and one‐ half miles long by one‐half mile broad, dropped, from an altitude of 30,000 feet, cannot pick out targets. Yet such bombings are now crisscrossing some of the most densely populated cities in the world, in an unprecedented orgy of killing and destruction that hor rifies people everywhere—as Guer nica, Coventry and Dresden once hor rified them. And all in our name.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Dec. 29 — The United States military command re ported the loss of two more B‐52 bombers yesterday as the air attack on North Vietnam that began 12 days ago con tinued without letup. 
SYDNEY, Australia, Dec. 28 (UPI) — The Seamen's Union of Australia today announced a boycott against all United States shipping in Australian ports as a protest against American bombing of North Vi etnam.
PEKING, Dec. 28 —Premier Chou En‐lai asked an Ameri can correspondent here tonight to let the American people know that the renewed bomb ing of North Vietnam would have an adverse effect on Chi na's relations with the United States. 
GENEVA, Dec. 28—The Inter national Committee of the Red Cross has suspended indefinite ly the visits it had been making to political prisoners in South Vietnam. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 28—One of Hanoi's most animated and colorful, streets, Kham Thien, is a mass ruins and a scene of desolation and mourning today in the wake of the latest series of American air raids.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 28—Acting on the last day be fore the expiration of his spe cial decree powers, President Nguyen Van Thieu last night quietly signed a law that South Vietnamese political leaders say will eliminate virtually all political parties except Mr. Thieu's new Democratic party.
WASHINGTON—If confusion has been the chronic state of the American public mind during most of the Viet nam conflict, there is little to suggest that its terminal phase will be a period of enlightened understanding. Since Oct. 26 when we first became aware of the sudden hope in the Paris negotia tions our understanding of the situa tion has become increasingly clouded by veiled or inadequate official state ments supplemented by endless media speculations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 28—Acting on the last day be fore the expiration of his spe cial decree powers, President Nguyen Van Thieu last night quietly signed a law that South Vietnamese political leaders say will eliminate virtually all political parties except Mr. Thieu's new Democratic party. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 28— Dissidents within the scientific community tried to mount a massive protest against Ameri can bombing of North Vietnam today, but found little support. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 28—One of Hanoi's most animated and colorful streets, Kham Thien, is a mass ruins and a scene of desolation and mourning today in the wake of the latest, series of American air raids.
Apparently because there have been public aemonstra tions in Yugoslav cities pro testing the resumption of the United States bombing of North Vietnam, intense secur ity measures were in effect as Mrs. Edward F. Cox, the former Tricia Nixon, and her husband arrived by plane in Belgrade. Several American Embassy cars were waiting at the airport as the couple arrived and were taken to their official host, Ambassa dor Malcolm Toon. Because of the security consideration, the Coxes' sightseeing in Bel grade is expected to be minimal. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Dec. 29 — The United States military command re ported the loss of two more B‐52 bombers yesterday as the air attack on North Vietnam that began 12 days ago con tinued without letup. 
PARIS, Dec. 28 — North Vietnam said in a statement is sued here today that its air defenses had accounted for a third of all the B‐52's mobilized for the current bombing at tacks. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 29 (Agence France‐Presse)— The singer Joan Baez and three. other Americans left today aboard a Canton‐bound Chinese airliner after having been de layed in Hanoi by the bombing. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 29 — Unrest is growing in Congress, among both Democrats and Re publicans over the heavy bomb ing of North Vietnamese cities. 
To the Editor:
This year began with exceptional promise as President Nixon prepared daring new initiatives in American foreign policy, including most notably his plans for a historic visit to Communist China.
LONDON, Dec. 29 — The Swedish Premier, Olof Palme, said tonight that he was ready at any time to have a public discussion with President Nixon on the “principles of democ racy.” 
SYDNEY, Australia, Dec. 29 (UPI)—Two more maritime unions joined the Australian Seamen's Union today in refus ing to handle American ships in Australian ports as a protest against United States bombing of North Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 29—South Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Tran Van Lam, said tonight that he believed the United States bombing of North Vietnam would force Hanoi's leaders to “accept serious nego tiations.” 
A group of antiwar activists led by the Rev. Daniel Berri gan handed out bloodstained leaflets on the steps of St. Patrick”s Cathedral yesterday to protest what they called a “sad and strange silence” on the part of Cardinal Cooke re garding the renewed bombing of North Vietnam.
SEARCY, Ark., Dec. 29 (AP) —Representative Wilbur D. Mills, Democrat of Arkansas, predicts that the House will ap prove an end‐the‐war resolution next year. 
LONDON, Dec. 29—The Evening News of London re ported today from Moscow that Mr. Brezhnev had post poned a planned visit to the United States next spring be cause of the delay in a Vietnam settlement.
PEKING, Dec. 29 — Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, the Vietcong's Foreign Minister, told 10,000 Chinese here today that the United States was trying to split the Vietnamese people from China and other Commu nist countries.
LONDON, Dec. 29—One symptom of the state of our civilization is the loss of confidence in reason. Mysticism and anti‐intellectualism flourish. R. D. Laing, the Savonarola‐psychiatrist, says our society is so terrible that schizophrenia is an appropriate reac tion.
PARIS, Dec. 29 — Foreign Minister Maurice Schumann in dicated today that France was trying to get negotiations be. tween the United States and North Vietnam going again. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 29— The United States, irritated by a statement by Premier Olof Palme of Sweden comparing the bombing of North Viet nam to Nazi massacres of World War II, has asked Stockholm not to send a new ambassador to Washington.
AGANA, Guam, Dec. 29—If ever there was an island with a split personality, Guam is it. The southern three‐quarters of the 212‐square‐mile island blazes in the tropical sun. The northern quarter, at Andersen Air Base here, it frenzied and tense during the current heavy bombing of North Vietnam. 
The Daily News has rejected an advertisement paid for and signed by 151 of its editorial employes that calls on President Nixon to make peace in South east Asia “without further delay.” 
PITTSBURGH—The war in Vietnam drags on and now it is becoming clear why 50,000. Americans died there. They died because they were duped, or because they were drugged, or because they were unlucky. Their dying had no point, and their perish ing had no meaning.
ANDERSEN AIR FORCE BASE, Guam, Dec. 29 — “The flight crews are different now,” said the young Air Force ser geant, a ground crewman. “Be fore, when they came back, they were always clowning around. Now they're shaken. They just get out of the plane and into the bus and go to the debriefing.” 
LONDON, Dec. 29 (AP)— Anxiety is increasing among European governments over the United States bombing of North Vietnam, and there were mounting protests today at official level. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Dec. 30—The loss of another B‐52 heavy bomber and three smaller aircraft was an nounced by the United States command yesterday. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Dec. 30—The loss of another B‐52 heavy bomber and three smaller aircraft was an nounced by the United States command yesterday. 
AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Dec. 29 (AP)—Demonstrators in Wellington today burned United States flag that had been flying at half staff in tribute to former President Harry S. Truman.
MENLO PARK, Calif., Dec. 29 (UPI)—A liberal Republican or ganization has asked President Nixon to order an immediate halt to the bombing of North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 29 — Unrest is growing in Congress among both Democrats and Re publicans over the heavy bomb ing of North Vietnamese cities.
MINNEAPOLIS, Dec. 29 (UPI) —Senator Hubert H. Humphrey, Democrat of Minnesota, said to day that the bombing of North Vietnam should be stopped “no matter what the difficulties.” 
Agence France‐Presse in a re port yesterday afternoon from Hanoi quoted North Vietnamese medical sources as having said that a second hospital in Hanoi —the Mai Huong Hospital—had been hit by American bombs in raids on Thursday. However, upon investigation, the French news agency reported last night that the hospital had been nar rowly missed in the bombing.
MOSCOW, Dec. 29 — Soviet and North Vietnamese leaders conferred here today in two separate meetings as the Krem lin appeared to be weighing its, next possible move to counter act the renewal of intense American bombing of North Vietnam. 
Earlier in this expiring year President Nixon made a significant distinction between his freedom of action in foreign and in domestic affairs. “In the field of foreign policy,” he said, “a President can act, and he should act and he should lead and, generally speaking, he can carry the country with him . . . but in the field of domestic policy, it is a very, very different matter. Here a President can propose, and then Congress does what it pleases.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Dec. 31—The United States command confirmed to day that American bombing of the heavily populated region of North Vietnam above the 20th Parallel—including the cities of Hanoi and Haiphoneg—stopped yesterday morning Saigon time.
SAIGON—Air raid sirens scream day and night. The earth trembles with the violence of an earthquake, and whole sections of the city crumble in a roar of flames and flying jagged steel. For the first time in the war the people seem afraid.
The bombing goes on, and where is the peace movement? Where are the demonstrations, marches and strikes? In November 1969 a quarter‐ to half a‐million Americans, mostly young, marched past the White House to the Washington Monument and declared by this solemn and peaceful assembly that they would take no part in the destruction of Vietnam. It made a dif ference.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 (AP)—Following is the text of the White House news conference today at which Gerald L. Warren, a deputy Presidential press secretary, announced an end to the bombing of the Hanoi‐Hai phong area and a renewal of the private Paris peace talks:
STOCKHOLM, Dec. 30 (UPI) —Premier Olof Palme said to day that President Nixon's de cision not to accept a new Swedish Ambassador to Wash ington would not stop him from criticizing the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 (AP) — The United States has lost shore than 8,500 planes and helicopters in the Southeast Asian war since 1961, Pentagon figures show. The value of these craft is estimated at $10.5 billion.
LONDON, Dec. 30—Prime Minister Heath today warmly welcomed the announcement in Washington that the bombing of North Vietnam would be halted and peace talks in Paris resumed.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30—The White House announced today that President Nixon had or dered a halt to the bombing of North Vietnam above the 20th Parallel and that Henry A. Kissinger would resume nego tiations for a Vietnam settle ment with Le Duc Tho in Paris on Jan. 8.
PARIS, Dec. 30—North Viet nam sought tonight to dispel the idea that it had yielded to military pressure in agreeing to further peace talks with the United States.
During the recently completed Presi dential campaign, and indeed during the spring primaries, I made innumer able speeches and gave many inter views on behalf of my father‐in‐law, George McGovern, It was not the standard, stereotyped stand‐in cam paigning which has typified the “fam ily participation” in national politics— rather, my wife and I went out each and every day with a simple and short message for our audiences: Lives hung in the balance in this election. People, both Vietnamese and Americans, were going to live or die depending on the outcome of the Presidential election. We stressed that George McGovern's election to the Presidency would save lives because of his pledges to stop the bombing and end the war, whereas Mr. Nixon, with, his decades‐long sup port of the Vietnamese conflict and prosecution of the war while in office, could not and should not be trusted to truly end the war.
The current American bombing of North Vietnam has destroyed any chance for an end to the war in the foreseeable future. The most important goal for the National Liberation Front and Hanoi has always been to dis engage America from the war per manently. In the recent history of the conflict this has meant, essentially, to remove American air power.
There have been many profound and even remarkable analyses of Her man Melville's great American classic “Moby Dick.” But perhaps the most remarkable interpretation is being rendered by the most outstanding Quaker of our time, that unseemly Captain Ahab, President Nixon.
MECHANICSBURG, Ohio, Dec. 30 (AP)—Senator William B. Saxbe, Republican of Ohio, who had earlier sharply criticized the renewed bombing of North Vietnam, today welcomed the announcement that it had been halted.
Because of changes in pro duction schedules for the holiday weekend, the Week in Review (Section 4) was printed early. As a result, it was not possible to include news or editorial comment on the Vietnam bombing halt ordered yesterday by President Nixon.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30—The cap ital is buzzing these days with rumors about a split between President Nixon and his security adviser Henry Kissin ger over the terms of a cease‐fire in Vietnam, but as usual in this gossipy town, the facts are less dramatic than the rumors.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30—The last of President Nixon's Christmas turkey was eaten today by the Chief Execu tive and his family in the form of a tired thin soup. With its going, this columnist is free at last to report de tails of his exclusive interview with the turkey as it awaited the honor of becoming Presidential alimentation.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON—A veteran member of Congress summed up the dominant mood: “I can't remember a more depressing holiday season. I was so sure we'd have peace by now that it never seemed possible that instead of peace we'd be bombing the hell out of North Vietnam.”
As one who is as fervent as The Times, in wishing for an end to the war in Vietnam, I feel compelled to differ with your editorial charge of Dec. 19. that Dr. Kissinger and the President “were either deceptive or naive” in holding out the prospect of an imminent peace.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 (AP)— The American Association for the Advancement of Scence, tke world's largest science organi zation, declared today that it “condemns” continued Ameri can participation in the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 30 — American intelli gence officials say that Hanoi has not transmitted its regu lar policy directions to Commu nist forces in South Vietnam for almost two months, appar ently because of the confusion over the Paris peace talks.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30—The 93d Congress convenes Wednes day with its members braced for a series of confrontations with President Nixon.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 — Official Washington seemed un sure today whether the heavy bombing of North Vietnam, which was ordered halted this morning, had helped or hin dered the United States in get ting the Paris negotiations re opened.
In Vietnam, an advanced electronic landing system, a versatile departure from pre vious equipment, has been in use for many months to help guide Air Force planes onto rugged strips.
To the Editor:
BEVERLY, Mass., July 31 (AP)—Henry Cabot Lodge, for mer Ambassador to Vietnam and currently special envoy to the Vatican, says the Federal Government should take over some of the costs of political campaigning.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 31 (AP)—American troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 500 men last week, to a total of 46,000, the United States command announced today. This leaves 7,000 men to be sent home in five weeks to meet President Nixon's goal of 39,000 men in the country by Sept. 1.
WASHINGTON, July 31 — Representative Samuel S. Strat ton, Democrat of upstate New York, is seeking to block the promotion of a career United States diplomat accused of having helped suppress news of the Mylai killings.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Aug. 1 (AP)—Three United States aircraft, includ ing a B‐52, crashed during a day of heavy air strikes against, North Vietnam and support missions for South Vietnamese troops, the United States com mand announced yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 1— The White House disclosed this morning that Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser, con ferred privately today for the second time in less than two weeks with North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris.
HONG KONG, Wednesday, Aug. 2 (Reuters)—A large num ber of North Vietnamese and Chinese were killed or wound ed during a United States air raid on a Haiphong residential area on Monday, the North Vietnam press agency said to day.
SAIGON, Wednesday, Aug. 2, (Reuters)—Two more American fighter‐bombers have been shot down over North Vietnam with all four crewmen listed as miss ing, the United States Command said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Aug. 2 — United States Navy pilots have bombed, a shipyard in Haiphong that builds and repairs the kind of shallow‐draft boats used to shuttle supplies ashore from freighters standing off the coast of North Vietnam, an American spokesman said yes terday.
Secretary of Commerce Peterson issued a contradictory set of signals when he arrived in Moscow last week begin his economic negotiations with Soviet officials. In his formal opening remarks at the airport he quoted old Russian proverb, “new life, new laws,” seemingly im plying that a new era in Soviet‐American economic relations had begun. But in a press conference immedi ately afterward, he reverted to extreme caution and sought to discourage any hopes of quick results from his talks.
WASHINGTON, Aug, 1 (AP) — The Government announced today that it was offering low interest business loans of up to $50,000 and counseling to low income Vietnam‐era veterans.
PARIS—The interesting thing about Chairman Mao Tse‐tung's recent con versation with French Foreign Minister Maurice Schumann was not the Chi nese leader's open disclosure that Lin Piao, once his designated successor, had mounted a conspiracy against him, had unsuccessfully attempted to flee to Moscow and was therefore consid ered a traitor. 
MOSCOW, Aug. 1—Secretary of Commerce Peter G. Peterson said today it would take top level decisions to break the deadlock on major issues block‐, ing a Soviet‐American trade, agreement and implied that So viet help in easing tension in such areas as Vietnam would influence Washington. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Aug. 3—North Viet namese gunners poured about 2,000 rounds onto South Viet namese marines fighting to retake the devastated city of Quangtri yesterday. 
SAIGON, Thursday, Aug. 3 (UPI)—Enemy gunners fired 27 rockets into the United States air base at Danang at dawn to day, killing one American and wounding 13, field reports said. It was the first rocket attack on the base since July 13 and the largest bombardment since 28 rounds struck the base last Feb. 9, spokesmen said.
A panel of Vietnam veterans, all former drug addicts, made an impassioned plea yesterday for huge Federal subsidies to community‐based, drug‐free antinarcotics programs in the city. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 2—The Senate, over the strenuous op position of the White House, narrowly adopted today an amendment requiring the with drawal of all American forces from Indochina in four months, subject to the concurrent re lease of prisoners of war. 
PARIS I Aug. 2—A series of unofficial contacts is taking place here among Communist and non‐Communist Vietnam ese, alongside the sterile offi cial negotiations. 
Secretary of Defense Mel vin R. Laird mentioned Gov ernor Rockefeller and former Secretary of the Treasury John B. Connally as qualified to succeed him at the Penta gon. Mr. Laird, repealing his intention to resign Jan. 20, named Deputy Defense Sec retary Kenneth Rush as an other possible successor. Mr. Laird was careful to say he was not advocating a partic ular successor and that he had not discussed the sub ject with President Nixon. But during a talk with news men in St. Louis, the Secre tary gave the impression that his personal favorite was Mr. Rockefeller.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 3 (UPI) —The Senate voted today to increase educational benefits for Vietnam veterans.
Both President Nixon and his Democratic rival, Senator George McGovern, got comeuppances this week as the Senate completed action on a $20.5‐billion military pro curement bill.
PARIS, Aug. 3—Delegates to the Vietnam conference here traded sharp insults at their 153d session today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Aug. 4—The Saigon com mand said yesterday that. South Vietnamese troops had reoc cupied Fire Base Bastogne, a Government defense point on the northern front that was abandoned a week ago in the face of intense North Viet namese shelling and ground at tacks.
TOKYO, Aug. 3 (AP)—Eight American B‐52 bombers return ing to Guam from a raid on Vietnam landed early today on Okinawa for the third time since the island was returned to Japan May 15, officials of the Japanese defense agency said. The agency said the bombers flew to the Kadena Air case because of bad weather over Guam, the same reason given for the previous landings. The Japanese Government has asked the United States to do all it can to keep the B‐52's away from Okinawa because the Okinawans and the Japa nese are opposed to direct in volvement in the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 3 (AP)—Eight Ameri cans were killed in action in Vietnam last week and 17 were wounded, the United States command announced today in its weekly casualty summary. It added that three more Americans died from noncombat causes and that one was missing in action.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 3—The Senate Foreign Relations Com mittee has temptirarily dropped from a State Department pro motion list the name of a ca reer diplomat who is accused of helping suppress news of the Mylai killings. The diplomat is James A. May of California, currently serving as adminis trative officer in the United States Embassy in Somalia.
It seems hard for Presidents of the United States to accept the notion that the Secretary General of the United Nations has a positive responsibility to speak freely in the interest of a more peaceful world.
The worldwide American war on opium‐growing and heroin smuggling promises to be at least as protracted, and per haps as inconclusive, as the conflict in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 3 —The Sen ate's 49‐47 vote to withdraw all United States forces from Indochina within four months, provided all prisoners of war are released, amounts to a vote of no‐confidence in President Nixon's tougher peace terms.
WASHINGTON—One of the most disturbing qualities about the political process is its all or nothing quality. The days in which issues were ad dressed with due regard for their com plexity appear to be on the wane, or perhaps they never were. But it seems to me that one of the signs of a func tioning and healthy political system is an awareness that gray shades into both black and white. Tolerance for the views of others requires an under standing that “out of Vietnam before 1973” is not the ultimate in political and social wisdom but only its begin ning.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 3 — Allied intelligence of ficials say that Communist po litical officers have publicly ex ecuted hundreds of Saigon Gov ernment officials and impris oned thousands during their occupation of Binhdinh Prov ince, on the central coast of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Aug. 5 (AP)—South Vietnamese marines reported that they killed 44 North Viet namese soldiers in fighting around Quangtri yesterday, but that their drive to isolate the walled Citadel, in the heart of the city, was at a standstill.
Mayor Lindsay has issued a proclamation at City Hall desig nating today as “Stop the Bombing Day” in the city. The proclamation was presented to Shirley A. Siegel, national coor dinator for the National Peace Action Coalition, who said the group would hold a demonstra tion in Duffy Square, Broadway and 47th Street, at 2 P.M. and a rally at the Mall in Central Park at 4 P.M.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Aug. 4 . (Agence France‐Presse) — A former United States Attorney General, Ramsey Clark, visited a hamlet yesterday that the North Vietnamese said had been bombed by American air craft less than two weeks ago. He also watched villagers re pairing damage to a dike. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 4 (AP) —Declaring there has been de liberate United States bombing of the North Vietnamese dike system, 10 Democratic Senators today asked Congress to go on record against it. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 4 — Sehior Defense Department of ficials said today that North Vietnam had virtually com pleted a second new fuel pipe line from China to Ken, a town 30 miles northeast of Hanoi. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 4— Members of a coalition of anti war organizations outlined to. day their plans for protest activities at the Republican Na tional Convention in Miami Beach and pledged that there would be no violence. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 5—Al though neither an end of the Vietnam war nor a release of prisoners seems imminent, the Administration has quietly drawn up a detailed program, code‐named Operation Egress Recap, for the eventual return and rehabilitation of the more than 500 Americans believed held captive in Southeast Asia. 
The public execution of an estimated 250 to 500 Saigon officials and others by Communist forces during their occupation of Binhdinh Province adds another sordid chapter to the bloody history of the Vietnam war. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Aug. 6 (AP)—South Vietnamese troops have opened a new drive against North Vietnamese and Viet cong forces in the Parrot's Beak region of Cambodia, the Saigon command announced yesterday. 
WASHINGTON—One morning last week a reporter here received a call from a senior White House official. The official quarreled with the report er's rather gloomy assessment, based largely on opinions furnished by the State Department, that Henry A. Kis singer's meeting in Paris with Hanoi's top negotiators last Tuesday had pro duced no evidence of progress. The reporter asked: “Can it be written, then, that there was progress?” “No,” the official replied, “my point is simply that it would be wise to withhold judgment.” 
EUGENE, Ore.—There is one cer tainty about the House resolution in which five congressmen seek to im peach President Nixon for “high crimes and misdemeanors” the resolution will never be placed before the House by the Committee on the Judiciary. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 5—President Nguyen Van Thieu today issued a stringent decree, aimed at controlling the press, that seems certain to close down many and perhaps most of the daily newspapers in South Vietnam. The move was viewed by South Vietnamese newsmen and diplomatic ob servers as an attempt to eliminate all opposition com ment and criticism. 
The shift from ground to air in the focus of American military activities in Indochina has meant a shift from units based in South Vietnam to combat groups operating from air bases in Thailand and carriers at sea. The result has been a drastic cut in the visibility of the war to the American people, who must still bear the moral arid financial burdens of this interminable conflict. 
The Vietnam war and eco nomic problems are the princi pal concerns of American voters, according to a Gallup Poll based on interviews con ducted in mid‐July. 
SAIGON—On the evening of May 20, Communist cadres assembled about 500 people in the hamlet of Binh chuong in northern Binhdinh province and recited a list of “crimes” they said had been committed by Nguyen Xuan Phong, the Social Affairs Commission er of Hoaiduc village. As Mr. Phong, his arms tied behind him, knelt on the road that runs through Binh chuong, the chairman of the Hoaiduc People's Revolutionary Committee asked the crowd: “Is this man worthy of being shot dead?” 
ASERIOUS commitment to serious art is a difficult position to hold today. Several years ago I took part in a symposium to discuss “Is Painting Dead?” Barbara Rose was moderator, and with me at the inquest were Robert Rauschenberg, Don Judd and Larry Poons. Suddenly, in the middle of it all, a man jumped up, ran to the front of the balcony and abused us hysterically for not talking about things more important, more “real.” It was immoral, he screamed, to go on about mere art with the horrors of Vietnam in headline. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 6 (Reuters)—President Nguyen Van Thieu has dis missed his Defense Minister, Lieut. Gen. Nguyen Van Vy, following a financial scandal involving mismanagement of South Vietnam's big military savings fund.
SAIGON, Aug. 6 (AP)—A North Vietnamese force esti mated at more than 100 men seized five hamlets near Hue today in what senior United States officers said might be the first move in a possible at tack on the city.
HONG KONG, Aug. 6—Ram sey Clark, the former Attorney General, who is on a visit to North Vietnam, told the Hanoi radio today that he had seen a dike, a sluice gate, a hos pital for lepers and a children's school that had been bombed by United States planes.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Aug. 7—United States Navy jets bombed a large re pair center for trucks and con struction equipment two miles south of the city limits of Hanoi Saturday, an American military spokesman announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Aug 8 (AP)—Amer ican jets wiped out 14 tanks supporting a new Communist, drive in Cambodia while, in the northern sector of South Vietnam, Government militia men repelled waves of enemy infantry that attacked their outposts, the allied commands reported yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 7—In the opinion of some Republi can Senators, President Nixon contributed to his own defeat on the Vietnam issue in the Senate last week by presuming, in a letter, to lecture Congress on its responsibilities.
Taking the oath of office, Elaine Edwards of Louisiana became the 10th woman to bear the title of United States Senator. Then, Mrs. Ed wards, who was named to succeed the late Allen J. Ellen der by her husband, Gov. Edwin W. Edwards faced the press.
PHILADELPHIA, Aug. 7 (AP) A special three‐judge Federal court turned down today a suit by peace activists who challenged the constitutionality of the Vietnam war and sought to cut off funding for it.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Aug. 8 (Reuters)— Seven Frenchmen, under stood to he employes of rub ber plantations, have been released after two months of captivity by Communist troops north of Saigon, it was reported today.
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 7 (AP)—Miss America and six other beauty queens left today on a 21‐day entertainment tour of United States military bases) in Southeast Asia after a news conference at which they sup ported President Nixon's Viet nam policy. Laurie Lea Schaefer, Miss America of 1972, told newsmen last night that Mr. Nixon's policies “have helped to retain the honor of the United States.”
WASHINGTON, Aug. 7—The State Department said today that North Vietnamese forces had deliberately poured shells into columns of South Vietnam ese civilian refugees last April 29 and 30, resulting in the deaths of 1,000 to 2,000 civil ians.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Aug. 8 (Reuters) Two opposition Saigon dailies have folded because of a new government crackdown on the press requiring heavy financial deposits from all newspapers, it was reported today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 7 (AP)—American troop strength in South Vietnam was reduced by 1,400 men last week, to a total of 44,600, the United States command an nounced today.
To the Editor:
The reaction of New York City's District Attorneys to the Knapp Commission report on police corruption has been almost hysterical. It has also been disappoint ing. Typical was the forecast of Bronx District Attorney Burton Roberts that the report would so undermine public confidence in law enforcement as to provoke “anarchy the streets which will make Vietnam look like a picnic.” 
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 8 (AP) —When President Nixon begins his acceptance speech inside convention hall, demonstrators will flood into the streets for “nonviolent civil disobedi ences,” according to the plan of the protest leaders. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 8 (UPI) —Mrs. Richard Nixon, criticiz ing Jane Fonda's charges of American bombing damage in North Vietnam, said today that the actress should have asked Hanoi “to stop their aggres sion,” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Aug. 9—South Viet namese soldiers reportedly fought enemy forces in rubber plantations 17 miles east of Sai gon yesterday and early reports from the field said that Gov ernment casualties were heavy. 
To the Editor:
To the Editor:
TOKYO, Wednesday, Aug. 9 (AP)—The Hanoi radio quoted. Ramsey Clark today as having said that he had seen “massive destruction” in many parts of Haiphong and that many people must have been killed by American bombing. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 8 (AP)—Two months after napalm dropped by a South Vietnamese plane sent Phan Thi Kim Phuc, who is 9 years old, screaming in pain and panic down a high way northwest of Saigon, she has nearly recovered from her burns. 
GEORGETOWN, Guyana, Aug. 9 (AP)—The Union of Arab Emirates and Bahrain, newly independent Persian Gulf countries, were admitted as participants in the conference of nonaligned nations here yes terday, but a bid from the Viet cong ran into resistance. The 64 countries attending the con ference admitted Oman, also on the Arabian peninsula, as an observer. 
BONGSON, South Vietnam, Aug. 6—“When the Commu nists came a lot of people here were very happy,” the bony jawed old farmer said bitterly. “Only now, people have had their eyes opened. The Com munists made nice speech es. But look at what happened.” 
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Aug. 9 (AP)—Four Vietnam Veterans Against the War went to jail, today for refusing to answer, questions about alleged plans for violence at the national po litical conventions in Miamil Beach. 
SAIGON, Aug. 9 (AP)—United States F‐4 Phantom jets for the second time in three months knocked out the bridge at Thanhhoa in North Viet nam, the Seventh Air Force re ported today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Aug. 10—Nearly 100 Government militiamen report edly have been killed or wound ed in clashes in the jungles and rubber plantations east of Saigon. 
PARIS, Aug. 9 (Reuters)— The North Vietnamese News Agency charged in a dispatch received here today that Ameri can bombers carried out an “extermination” raid yesterday on Haiduong, a town about 30 miles east of Hanoi. It said that the bombs hit a medical school, a factory and cafes, killing and wounding “a large number of people.”
MILWAUKEE, Aug. 9 (AP)— Delegates to the International Typographical Union conven tion today overwhelmingly re jected resolutions supporting Senator George McGovern, the Democratic Presidential nomi nee, and calling for immediate withdrawal of American forces from Southeast Asia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 10 (UPI)—American com bat casualties increased last week to seven killed and 36 wounded because of enemy rocket attacks on United States bases, military spokesmen said today.
To the Editor: When Senator McGovern talks about Indochina, he means Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. But I, as a Chinese, understand that Indochina is “the peninsula in Southeast Asia between the Bay of Bengal and the South China Sea, comprising South Vietnam, North Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Malaya and Burma.” So if McGovern means to “withdraw all U.S. forces from Indochina,” he cannot leave any military personnel in Thailand. I be lieve the North Vietnamese use the same definition of “Indochina” that I use.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 10 — The extra cost of the Vietnam war, resulting from the renewal of heavy bombing and other United States air and naval ac ivity since the North Vietna mese offensive, will be $1.1‐ billion in the current fiscal year, the Defense Department disclosed today. This is less than the Nixon Administration previously estimated.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Aug. 11—The United States military command an nounced today that the last two infantry combat units in South Vietnam had been with drawn from the field.
PARIS, Aug. 10—The former Hotel Majestic on Avenue Kle ber, where the American and Vietnamese delegates to the peace talks perform their week ly ritual, seems much more than half a world away from the agonizing realities of the war.
As President Nixon seeks a pre‐election finale to the Vietnam war, President Thieu continues to play havoc with political freedom in South Vietnam. After a cam paign of mass arrests, in which thousands of Commu nist and non‐Communist critics of the regime were herded to detention camps, Mr. Thieu has now moved to silence opposition from an already intimidated press.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 10 (AP) —An attempt to subpoena Jane Fonda, the actress, to testify about her Hanoi visit and anti war broadcasts was rejected by the House Internal Security Committee today.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 10— Representative Les Aspin has charged that Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle, who was removed as the American Air Force com mander in Vietnam after he ordered unauthorized bombing raids on the North, was retired a month later with a 70 per cent disability rating unsup ported by medical evidence.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 10—In a crucial setback for the anti war movement in Congress, the House of Representatives re jected today an amendment de manding the withdrawal of all American forces from Indo china.
PARIS, Aug. 10 (AP)—The Vietcong delegation to the peace talks insisted today “there is no other way” to end the Vietnam war except for the United Stales to get out and stop supporting the present Saigon Government.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Aug. 11 (AP)—South Vietnamese forces reportedly cleared the southern sector of Quangtri city yesterday and destroyed 14 North Vietnamese tanks in an air attack outside the northern provincial capital.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 11— Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that Sargent Shriver, the Democratic Vice Presidential nominee, was talk ing “bunk” and engaging in “political fantasy” when he as serted yesterday that President Nixon “blew” a chance to end the Vietnam war in 1969. 
ABOARD U.S.S. SARATOGA IN THE GULF OF TONKIN, Aug. 8—The pilots aboard this aircraft carrier swear that they have never tried to bomb the dikes of North Vietnam and they say they are hurt and irritated that so many Ameri cans at home do not seem to believe them. 
BOSTON, Aug. 11 (AP) — The Federal Bureau of In vestigation, Internal Revenue Service, Defense Secretary Mel vin R. Laird and Attorney Gen eral Richard G. Kleindienst were named as defendants to day in a suit over alleged wire taps on phones of four Cam bridge‐based antiwar groups, 
The removal from field duty in South Vietnam yester day of the last United States ground combat troops a landmark that unfortunately does not signify meaning ful progress toward peace in Indochina. The rejoicing would be vastly greater if there were genuine evidence of progress in the deadlocked negotiations in Paris if Congress were not throwing up its hands in resigna tion to an Administration apparently still unwilling to recognize that military victory is unattainable for either side in this tragic conflict. 
PARIS, Aug. 11—Mrs. Ngu yen TM Binh, the chief Viet cong delegate to the Paris peace talks, made it clear to day that the issue of American withdrawal from Vietnam, the focus of argument in the first years of the long‐drawn ‐ out talks, has now been replaced by the issue of organizing pow er in Saigon. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 11— Although they were defeated in efforts to keep a deadline for the withdrawal of Amer ican forces from Indochina in a foreign‐aid bill on the House floor yesterday, most of the more liberal Democratic Rep resentatives from New York City voted to pass the aid bill any way. A major reason was that the meas ure, authoriz ing $2.1‐billion in foreign military assistance, contained $350‐million for Israel, mostly for credit pur chases of planes and other weapons.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Aug. 12 — Commando I raids, shelling and ground as saults by the North Vietnamese and Vietcong stepped up all over South Vietnam in the last 24 hours. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 11 (AP) — South Viet namese police have quietly re leased the father of Nguyen Thai Binh, an airplane hijacker slain here July 2. Nguyen Van Hai, who supports a wife and eight surviving children as a clerk‐typist in the civil service, was held without charges for almost a month after his 24‐ year‐old son was shot to death aboard a Pan American 747 he sought to take to Hanoi. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 11—The last American ground‐combat unit in Viet nam was deactivated today, a day after one of its com panies returned from a four‐ day mission during which two Men were wounded by booby traps. The unit, the Third Battalion of the 21st Infantry, with supporting ar tillery and a medical detach ment, guarded the big United States air base at Danang. The battalion has 1,043 men. The United States command said that most of the battalion's men would be going home in the next few days, but those with job specialties still needed in Vietnam and those with less than six months' Vietnam service would stay. As of last week 44,600 Amer ican servicemen were left in South Vietnam, not including sailors in the Seventh Fleet off the coast or airmen in Thailand and Guam who fly missions over North and South Vietnam. The first American ground combat bat talion landed in Vietnam March 8, 1965. It was the Third Battalion, Ninth Marine Regiment. At the height of its involvement in 1968, the Unit ed States had 112 ground com bat battalions in Vietnam.
BINHLAM, South Vietnam, Aug. 11—Despite a decade of pacification efforts throughout South Vietnam, Vietcong agents have apparently been collecting monthly taxes from rubber plantation workers within 20 miles of Saigon without inter ruption since at least 1967. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 11 — Peter G. Peterson, Secretary of Commerce, who returned from talks in Moscow 10 days ago without the Soviet‐American trade agreement the President wants, said today he is confi dent the pact will be achieved by the end of the year. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12—In Danang this morn ing there were no flourishes, not even a parade, as the Third Battalion of the 21st Infantry and other components of what had been Task Force Gimlet said good‐by to the war. Maj. Gen. H. H. Cooksey said a few words, pinned on some ribbons and then, for all practical pur poses, the last American ground troops were gone. 
SAIGON—Police crackdowns, prison torture and arbitrary government be havior in general are nothing new to the South Vietnamese, but President Nguyen Van Thicu's latest steps to tighten his control over all aspects or life here have alarmed even his long suffering countrymen. 
To the Editor:
UTRECHT, The Netherlands, Aug. 12—The Rev. Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, general secre tary of the World Council of Churches, said today that the White House's reaction to his recent letter to President Nixon denouncing the alleged United States bombings of the dikes in North Vietnam was “unsatis factory.” 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 12 (AP) —Mr. Mitchell called on Sen ator George McGovern today to repudiate publicly what Mr. Mitchell Called “the outrageous conduct” of Ramsey Clark in Hanoi. 
One of the indestructible myths about the Vietnam war is that the nation's leaders drifted into it, un aware of where step‐by‐step decisions were leading. But as the scenario starts to unroll all over again, with massive bombing mounting toward the peak levels of the past, the myth needs close re‐examination. 
GEORGETOWN, Guyana, Aug. 12—Foreign ministers of more than 60 countries ended a conference of non aligned nations here today and welcomed the recent improve ment in East‐West relations. But they said that while the easing of tensions reduced the threat of nuclear war, its ef fects were geographically lim ited. 
The witnesses included a chicken farmer, some students, a pipe fitter, an undertaker and a man who had been a brassiere salesman at the time of the trial of Lieut William Calley but was now a carpet installer. They were once more in the long file of ex‐G.I.'s taking the stand to describe what had happened at Mylai. This time, the accused was Capt. Ernest Medina. It puzzled Mary McCarthy, the novelist and critic who has written this book about the pro ceedings, to “see no traces whatever of the crime and its aftermath either in Medina, joking and whispering with counsel” or in the men who testified. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12—In the last 24 hours B‐52 bombers carried out what a spokesman described as “prob ably their heaviest raids ever” over North Vietnam.
The American Civil Liberties Union and the New York Civil Liberties Union accused the Federal Government yesterday of trying to use the Federal Election Act of 1971 to curb free speech. 
The McGovern candidacy has evoked more sound and fury from vociferous ele ments or the business com munity than that of any any nominee since Franklin D. Roosevelt. Yet the fact is that Senator George McGovern's views are closely allied with the long‐run interests of an enlightened business commu nity and should command its support. 
MADISON, Wis., Aug. 12— Senator Gaylord Nelson charged yesterday that several hundred acres of hillside forest land in Grant County had been “scarred” by a defoliant that has been banned for military use in Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12—Documents smuggled out of South Vietnamese pris ons and extensive interviews with former prisoners paint picture of widespread torture of people jailed by the Saigon Government since the North Vietnamese offensive started four and a half months ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12 (UPI)—The former United States Attorney Gen eral, Ramsey Clark, reportedly said in Hanoi today that the health of American prisoners of war in North Vietnam whom he had visited was “better than mine, and I am a healthy man.” 
SAIGON—The American company returned last Thursday from patrol. It had been an uneventful four‐day affair; two of the men were wounded by booby traps. It was also the last ground combat mission to be per formed by the Americans in South Vietnam. The next day the company's parent outfit, the Third Battalion of the 21st Infantry—the last American ground‐combat unit in Vietnam— was deactivated at Danang, the air base where the first American ground combat unit landed in Vietnam March 8, 1965. Most of the men of the Third Battalion are going home. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 12 — W. Averell Harriman and Cyrus R. Vance supported today the assertion of Sargent Shriver, the Democratic Vice‐Presidential nominee, that President Nixon, at the outset of his Adminis tration, “blew” an opportunity for a negotiated peace in Viet nam. 
TALLAHASSEE, Fla„ Aug, I3—The Government's case against six members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War charged with plotting an assault on the Republican Na tional Convention appears to rest primarily on the testimony of an informer for the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had established a reputation as one of the antiwar group's more militant and vociferous members.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 13 (AP) — A Vietnamese priest, taken to Hanoi after his parish was overrun in the enemy offensive, says North Vietnam wants to barter Ameri can prisoners for the rebuilding of the country.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 13—President Nguyen Van Thieu, in a major speech, has said that to save South Viet nam, the United States must “keep up relentless bombing” of North Vietnam for another six or seven months, but at the same time he raised ap parent doubts about Washing ton's willingness to go on bombing at the same intensity.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 13 (UPI)—Senator Robert J. Dole of Kansas, the Republican Na tional Chairman, termed “pre posterous” today the charge by Mr. Shrivel that President Nixon missed a “golden oppor tunity” to end the Vietnam war in 1969.
To the Editor:
BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 13 (UPI)—Ramsey Clark, re turning from an inspection tour of North Vietnam, said today that he had seen extensive damage, including damage to dikes, from United States bombing raids. He said the bombing could not be justified.
Two former United States delegates to the United Na tions have accused President Nixon and other Administration officials of misleading the pub lic about the bombing of dikes in North Vietnam.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 13 (UPI) — Representative John J. Rhodes, of Arizona, chairman of the Republican National Con vention Platform Committee, said today that Senator George McGovern's proposed defense spending cuts would make the United. States a second‐rate power that would have diffi culty defending even Hawaii.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 13—Senator George McGovern accused President Nixon today of directing subordinates question the loyalty of Ramsey Clark, former Attorney General of the United States, as part of a “low road” campaign for re‐election.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Aug. 14 (AP)—Viet cong troops blew up two am munition dumps and a bridge near South Vietnam's two larg est cities yesterday in the latest of a series of demolition attacks, the Saigon command reported.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 14 (UPI) —If the Justice Department de cides not to prosecute Jane Fonda for her radio broadcasts from Hanoi, it should recom mend legislation to provide criminal penalties for similar cases in the future, the House Internal Security Committee said today.
SAI GON, South Vietnam, Aug. 14—Provided that Ameri can support of the war effort here is not radically reduced by Congress or the election to the Presidency of Senator George McGovern, South Viet namese commanders foresee an indefinite military conflict with Hanoi that could last years or decades.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 14 — Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national se curity, held another private meeting with North Vietnam's negetiators in Paris today, the White House announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug? 1.4 (UPI) — The with drawal of 2,200 Americans last week raised to more than 500,000 the number of United States troops pulled out of South Vietnam since President Nixon began the military cutback here three years ago, the United States command said today.
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 14— Mr. Kleindienst said at a news conference here that the Justice Department had found no evi dence of criminal violations by Miss Fonda.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Aug. 15 — Another South Vietnamese ammunition dump was blown up early yes terday as Communist com mando attacks, urban terrorism and shelling continued to in crease.
SAIGON, Aug. 14 (Reuters) —A South Vietnamese Gov ernment official today denied a report in The New York Times that political prison ers were being tortured in South Vietnamese jails.
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 14— Ramsey Clark, a former United States Attorney General, said here today that he thought that a few American prisoners of war would be released soon by North Vietnam.
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 15— Ramsay Clark said here last night that he had been wrong not to speak out against the Vietnam war when he was Deputy Attorney General and then Attorney General in Pres ident Johnson's Cabinet while the war was expanding.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 15 (AP) — The United States Seventh Air Force apologized today for baying distributed to about 25 newsmen copies of an editorial in the Aug. 7 issue of Aviation Week & Space Technology that reflected the official Government position on the bombing of North Vietnam.
YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio, Aug. 15—Senator George McGovern declined a Presidential invita tion to be briefed on the Vietnam situation by Henry A. Kissinger because, he said here today, official White House briefings customarily “go wide of the mark.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 15 (UPI)—An influential South Vietnamese senator said to day that 920 innocent people, “mostly women and children,” were being held at suspected Communist sympathizers with out trial in the Con on island prison.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15—The charge by Sargent Shriver, the Democratic Vice Presidential nominee, that President Nixon “blew” a chance to end the Vietnam war in 1969 has pro duced a stormy political debate in Washington, but as with many controversies over Viet nam, the historical truth re mains murky and subject to many interpretations.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15 — John N. Mitchell, the former head of President Nixon's re election organization, said to day that RaMsey Clark had been “duped” during a recent visit to North Vietnam and had al lowed himself to he used by that country in a propaganda campaign.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15—Henry Kis singer's trips to Paris are good news and good politics, since they suggest that there is some movement toward peace, but the fact is that even Kis singer does not expect any real change in the Paris talks until late in the elec tion campaign.
Secretary Rogers, former Ambassador Lodge and the State Department are being disingenuous, to put it mildly, in denying “any” knowledge of the 1969 chance for peace in Vietnam that Democratic Vice‐Presidential nominee Sargent Shriver and former Ambassadors Harriman and Vance claim President Nixon “blew.” Interpretations of the events of that period may differ, but there can be little dispute on the facts or the Nixon Administration's detailed knowledge of them now and then.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Aug. 16 (AP)— United States B‐52 bombers flew heavy raids in the Saigon area early yesterday, striking at enemy positions as close as 24 miles from the capital.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15— President Nixon's adviser for national security, Henry A. Kissinger, left Switzerland to night for Saigon to consult with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam on efforts to negotiate a settlement of the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15— A Defense Department spokes man said today that depart ment officials were looking for the report described by Mr. Engstrom and that no comment could be made on his charges until the report had been found and reviewed. The spokesman added that a urinalysis study conducted last year among American troops in South Viet nam had showed that 5.54 per cent of those tested used heroin.
WICHITA, Kan., Aug. 15 (UPI) — A former Army cap tain said in an interview yes terday that a 1971 military re port estimating that 25 per cent of the lower‐ranking en listed men in Vietnam were addicted to heroin had deliber ately been withheld.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 15— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird urged Republicans to day to adopt a platform that “will reject policies of planned weakness, of white‐flag wav ing, of begging and of aban donment of our nation's role in helping to maintain peace.”
A survey of 456 of the richest, most powerful and most influ ential persons in the United States reveals a high level of acceptance of Government in tervention in the economy, ap proval of most of the things that make up the welfare state and rejection of hard‐line anti communism in foreign policy. 
George C. Wallace, the Governor of Alabama, under went surgery for the second time in a month to drain an abcess caused by the gunshot wounds that felled him in May. The operation, at the University of Alabama Hos pital in Birmingham, was completed “without compli cations,” according to a hos pital spokesman. 
WASHINGTON—Aug. 10, 1972 was my most depressing day as a member of Congress. On that black Thursday the House rejected, by 228 to 178, its last clear chance in this Congress to set a date for total U.S. military with drawal from Indochina. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 16— Paul C. Warnke, the former Defense Department official named by Senator George Mc Govern yesterday as his for eign policy liaison with the White House, agreed with oth er Democrats today that Pres ident Nixon “blew” an opportunity for peace in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Aug. 17—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser for national security, arrived in Saigon last night amid lightning and rain and much speculation about the purpose of his trip. 
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 16 — Senator Jacob K, Javits, who was chosen by Administration leaders to present dissent from the left before the Platform Committee of the Republican National Convention, opposed President Nixon's policies on Vietnam, busing and drugs to day.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 16 — Senator Thomas F. Eagleton, in his first major appearance in support of the Democratic tick et since leaving it two weeks ago, charged the Nixon Admin istration today with having “embarked on a course of raw retaliation” in Vietnam. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 16 (UPI) — Former Secretary of State Dean Rusk disagrees with some of his former colleagues that the Nixon Administration muffed a chance to end the Vietnam war early in 1969. 
Former Attorney General Ramsey Clark used poor judgment in publicly criticizing American war policies while on his fact‐finding mission to North Vietnam. For one so prominent in American governmental affairs to denounce United States actions in the capital of a nation with which this country is involved in combat was bound to detract from the humane course he hoped to advance.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 16 (UPI) —Ramsey Clark, at one point holding up a United States “bomblet” given him by Hanoi's Mayor, told a Senate subcom mittee today of seeing exten sive damage to dikes, homes and hospitals during his visit to North Vietnam. 
FIRE IN THE LAKE: THE VIETNAMESE AND THE AMERICANS IN VIETNAM, By Fran ces FitzGerald. 491 pages. Illustrated with maps, Atlantic‐Littie, Brown, $12.50.
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., Aug. 16 (AP)—Forty Vietnam Veterans Against the War, whose leaders are charged with conspiring to disrupt the Re publican National Convention next week marched peaceably through this city today on the way to Miami Beach. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 16— Sargent Shriver attacked Henry A. Kissinger's mission to Saigon today as late, “frenetic” and political. 
David T. Dellinger and the Rev. Daniel J. Berrigan announced yesterday that dem onstrations at the Republican National Convention in Miami Beach next week would include evidence of dike bombing in North Vietnam and would cul minate in a massive sit‐down Wednesday outside the conven tion hall. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 16— Senator George McGovern con firmed today that Pierre Salin ger, the former Presidential press secretary, had met with North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris at his request to dis cuss the prisoner of war situ ation. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Aug. 17—American bombers have crippled anew a key North Vietnamese power plant that was extensively damaged in a raid two months ago and subsequently rebuilt, the United States command re ported yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17— North Vietnam, in what it called an “important editorial,” seemed today to rebuke both the Soviet Union and China for allowing relations with the United States to weaken their support for Hanoi's cause. 
SAIGON, Friday, Aug. 18 (AP) —The Saigon command report ed yesterday that airborne troops supported by air strikes and artillery killed 68 enemy (soldiers in two engagements in foothills about nine miles south of Quangtri without suffering any casualties. 
PARIS, Aug. 18 — Hanoi's spokesman at the Paris peace talks said today that President Nixon was trying to create an impression of optimisim while at the same time intensifying the war in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17 — The Justice Department filed suit today against the National Committee for Impeachment, charging that it had violated Federal election laws by spon soring a newspaper advertise ment in May calling for Presi dent Nixon's removal from office. 
MOSCOW, Aug. 17 (Reuters). —Le Duc Tho, chief adviser to Hanoi's delegation at the Paris peace talks, made a brief stop in Moscow today on his way home. According to Tass, the official press agency, he re ceived assurances of continued Soviet aid to North Vietnam.
MOSCOW, Aug. 17 (Reuters). —Le Duc Tho, chief adviser to Hanoi's delegation at the Paris peace talks, made a brief stop in Moscow today on his way home. According to Tass, the official press agency, he re ceived assurances of continued Soviet aid to North Vietnam.
Senator William Proxmire, a critic of the nation's space program, has become chair man of a subcommittee that has a dominant role in shap ing the space budget. The Wisconsin Democrat now heads the Senate Appropria tions Subcommittee in a shift caused by the death of Sena tor Allen J. Ellender of Loui siana. 
MOSCOW, Aug. 17 (Reuters). —Le Duc Tho, chief adviser to Hanoi's delegation at the Paris peace talks, made a brief stop in Moscow today on his way home. According to Tass, the official press agency, he re ceived assurances of continued Soviet aid to North Vietnam.
HUE, South Vietnam, Aug. 17 (UPI)—South Vietnamese medi cal sources said today that rec ord numbers of raids by B‐52 bombers have killed and wound ed more civilians in embattled Quangtri Province than North Vietnamese gunfire had. 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17—The Nixon campaign strategy of dominating the news by bold foreign policy moves is working as planned and keeping Sen ator George McGovern constantly on the defensive.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17—The Nixon Administration charged today that contacts between representatives of Sen ator George McGovern and North Vietnamese officials could damage the quest for peace in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 17 (UPI)—Four Ameri cans were killed and 28 were wounded in the war in Viet nam last week, the United States command reported to day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Aug. 18 — American fighter‐bomber pilots reportedly flew more than 370 strikes against North Vietnam on Wednesday in what appears to have been the heaviest day of raids of the year. 
MILWAUKEE, Aug. 17 —A senior member of Senator George McGovern's Democratic Presidential campaign got a telephone call at 12:15 A.M. on Tuesday, inquiring when and where the candidate's chartered airplane was to go later that day on a swing through the Middle West. The caller was Senator McGovern.
HONG KONG, Saturday, Aug. 19 (Reuters)—Le Duc Tho, a member of the North Viet namese Politburo, conferred with Premier Chou En‐lai of China in Peking yesterday on his way back to Hanoi for con sultations on the Paris peace talks.
SEATTLE, Aug 18—A middle‐aged man pedaled a bicycle with a rifle across the handlebars into the Reno Municipal Airport this morning, hijacked a jetliner to Seattle by way of Canada, received $1‐million ransom after holding the plane for 13 hours, and then was shot and captured by the F.B.I.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 18—Henry A. Kissinger concluded nearly six hours of talks with President Nguyen Van Thieu and departed for Tokyo today, leaving diplo matic observers as much in the dark as ever about what his trip here had signified.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 18— The proposed Republican plat form released today charges that the Democratic party “has been seized by a radical clique which scorns: our nation's past and would blight her future.”
WASHINGTON, Aug. 18 (AP) —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that Presi dent Nixon would make an other announcement on United States troop withdrawals from Vietnam on Aug. 28.
If a man keeps dangerous animals running wild on his estate, and one mauls a guest's child, he cannot escape responsibility by saying that he had no intention of letting children be hurt. That is generally the law now, and common sense. Subjective intent does not have to be proved, because keep ing wild animals where people go makes it so likely that someone will be hurt.The propaganda from Washington and Saigon makes it sound as though every American raid is hitting the Ruhr or some mighty military Installation. There is talk of destroying “indus tries” and “naval bases.” 
WASHINGTON, Aug. 18 — The White House issued a re buttal today to charges made by Sargent Shriver, the Demo cratic Vice‐Presidential nomi nee, that President Nixon “blew” an opportunity to end the Vietnam war in 1969.
A Justice Department suit against the National Commit tee for Impeachment of Presi dent Nixon is the “most incred ible violation of the First Amendment yet to come to our attention,” the American Civil Liberties Union and the New York Civil Liberties Union said yesterday. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday. Aug. 19 — Rockets fired by enemy gunners struck the Danang air base and a nearby residential area yester day, reportedly killing 27 South Vietnamese civilians and one American airman.

MILWAUKEE, Aug. 19—Senator George McGovern expects President Nguyen Van Thieu and his “cohorts” to flee Saigon into exile and a Communistdominated coalition to take control of South Vietnam if Mr. McGovern is elected President of the United States on Nov. 7.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 19—Marriages between Americans stationed here and Vietnamese women have risen to a peak rate since the beginning of the North Vietnamese offensive four months ago, even though the number of Americans now in South Vietnam is less than one tenth what it was in 1969.
To the Editor:
Henry Kissinger's consultationi in Saigon and the return to Hanoi of North Vietnam's chief Paris negotiator,. Le Duo Tho, suggest that a moment of truth is approachin the long quest for peace in Indochina. After three secret Kissinger‐Tho meetings in six weeks, both sides are reviewing the bidding in preparation for the final round of settlement talks before the American election.
WASHINGTON—In the spring of 1971, as he planned to unveil his projected “journeys for peace” to Peking and Moscow, President Nixon was quoted by his staff as saying at White House meeting: “Anyone who tries to make a political issue out of Vietnam in 1972 will have the rug
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 19—About three‐quarters of Saigon's newspapers are expected to suspend publication for two days next week in protest against a presidential decree earlier this month imposing harsh new restrictions on the press.
TOKYO, Aug. 19 — Premier Kakuei Tanaka of Japan and Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, defined the issues today for the meeting between the Premier and the President scheduled for Hawaii Aug. 31.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 19(UPI) —Senator McGovern met today with former Attorney General Ramsey Clark to receive a per sonal review of Mr. Clark's recent controversial trip to inspect bombing damage in North., Vietnam. Mr. Clark drove to Mr. McGovern's home fOr an hour‐long briefing.
To the Editor:
DALLAS, Aug. 19 — The master of ceremonies explained to ,the ‘dinner guests that salad was not. served because of boycott of lettuce picked by non‐union workers.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 19 (UPI) — The commander of a United States Air Force advisory team was wounded yesterday when struck by a rifle bullet while piloting a South Vietnamese Air Force helicopter gunship, the American command announced today.
SAIGON, Sunday, Aug. 20 (AP)—North Vietnamese sup ported by artillery overran a South Vietnamese fire base and district headquarters to seize control of the western half of the strategic Queson Valley 25 miles south of Danang, reports from the field said today.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, D. C.—“We of course don't take credit for the C.B.S. Spectrum commentators the wide range of opinion on The New York Times Op‐Ed Page,” White House aide Patrick J. Buchanan says with smile, “but consider C.B.S.'s Spectrum. They've got Jeffrey St. John and Stan Evans on the right, Stu Alsop in the middle, and Murray Kempton and Nick von Hoffman on the left. This is a balanced run of commentary which is a byproduct of the Vice President's criticism of the networks.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 19.—The United States command disclosed statistics today that indicated that enemy antiaircraft crews were now forced to fire about five times as many missiles to bring down a single plane as they were during the nineteen‐sixties.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 19 —President Nixon met tonight with Mr. Kissinger at Camp David, the President's retreat at Thurmont, Md. They were joined by Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Brig. Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., Mr. Kissinger's deputy.
QUESON VALLEY, South Vietnam: “Now the VC can go anywhere. We don't have enough troops,” says Maj. Nguyen Thai Buu, sitting on one of the new sandbags piled up at Landing Zone Ross. “My soldiers are very tired. They have been walking every day for the last six weeks. We have to keep the VC away from Queson town. If we give up Ross, they will go all the way the lowlands.”
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 19 —With their candidates, their rules, their platform and their record of performance all ready made by the White House, Republicans moved sedately through the heat here today toward their tamest national convention in years.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 19 —Between 30 and 40 per cent of Democratic voters now say that they will abandon George McGovern, their party's Presidential nominee, and vote to re‐elect President Nixon, according to two political surveys released today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Monday, Aug. 21—South Vietnamese troops have abandoned a northern district capital and nearby defense base in the lace, of a two‐day Communist shellMg and ground attack—the biggest Government loss since to early weeks of the North Vietnamese offensive, which began! March 30.

SAIGON, Monday, Aug. 21 (UPI) — Forty civilians were killed and 30 wounded yesterday when a bus carrying 70 persons hit a mine on the highway between Pleiku and Phunhon in the Central Highlands, South Vietnamese military spokesman said.
SAIGON, Aug. 20 (AP) —Three major supply highways to Saigon, two of them from the Mekong Delta and the Central Highlands, hays been reopened to traffic from the field, reports said today. The highways had been closed since Friday by enemy attacks. A fourth highway remained cut about 35 miles north of Saigon.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 20—The man who will shortly be renominated for President has done many significant things in his first term of office. But in a way his most remarkable achievement has been in the Vietnam war: He has taken a national mistake and made it an obsession.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 20 (Reuters) — American troop strength in Vietnam dropped to 39,200 last week, within 300 of President Nixon's withdrawal target for Sept. 1, a United States spokesman said today.
To the Editor: Your editorial ["The Real Issue,” July 31] purports to rely on an article by Professor Alexander M. Bickel, but it misreads that article. Professor Bickel does not contend, as you do, that the war in Vietnam is unconstitutional because Congress failed to pass a resolution “declaring” that a state of war exists between the United States and North Vietnam.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 21 (AP)—The United States command announced yesterday that American troop strength in Vietnam dropped to 39,200 men as of Thursday, and other sources said that in the following three days, it fell below 39,000, President Nixon's announced goal for Sept. 1.
GAINESVILLE, Fla., Aug. 21 —The city commission here voted tonight to let members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War camp on municipal property as they protest the arraignment of six of the war foes on conspiracy charges.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 21—The Republicans rolled easily through two of the five sessions of their national convention here today, combining nostalgic tributes to the heroes of past political wars with increasingly harsh attacks on President Nixon's challenger, Senator George McGovern.

The platform gives pride of place to the Nixon record in foreign policy. “Historians may well regard these years as a golden age of American diplomacy,” the platform declares with characteristic modesty. Since the Administration's diplomacy has been unable in three and one‐half years to negotiate a settlement of the Vietnam war; has alienated Japan, the strongest power in Asia, and India, the largest democracy in Asia; and has shown itself indifferent to the underdeveloped one‐third of the world, to say nothing of the United Nations, it will be astonishing if history reaches any such verdict.

WASHINGTON, Aug, 21—The Nixon Administration sought today to discourage speculation that a breakthrough in the Vietnam negotiations had been achieved or was imminent.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Aug. 22—Badly mauled South Vietnamese troops tried to rally yesterday to stem a North Vietnamese advance, after abandoning a northern district capital and its adjacent defense base to the Communists over the weekend.
MOUNT VERNON, N. Y., Aug. 21—The Republican controlled City Council here has passed a resolution asking PreSident Nixon and the city's representatives in Congress to “continue their efforts for an early withdrawal of all American forces from Vietnam.” The resolution, requested by the Mount Vernon Women for Peace, was adopted unanimously by the four Republicans and one Democrat on the board.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 20—The man who will shortly be renominated for President has done many significant things in his first term of office. But in a way his most remarkable achievement has been in the Vietnam war: He has taken a national mistake and made it an obsession.
To the Editor: Your editorial ["The Real Issue,” July 31] purports to rely on an article by Professor Alexander M. Bickel, but it misreads that article. Professor Bickel does not contend, as you do, that the war in Vietnam is unconstitutional because Congress failed to pass a resolution “declaring” that a state of war exists between the United States and North Vietnam.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 22 —Republican delegates entering their convention hall were harassed tonight by a crowd of more than 3,000 antiwar demonstrators, many with their faces painted to represent death masks, who chanted, cursed, jostled and sometimes beat on their cars.
To the Editor:
PARIS, Aug. 22—The spokesman for the National Liberation Front, or Vietcong, said today that Secretary of State William P. Rogers's optimistic prediction of an early Vietnam settlement was “entirely false.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Aug. 23—pposing North and South Vietnamese forces, exhausted by heavy casualties, were reported yesterday to have settled for the moment along a loose battle line northeast of the district capital of Queson, which fell to the Communists on Saturday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Aug, 22 (AP)—A civilian bus packed with passengers ran over a nine in the Central Highlands today, Wiling 21 persons and wounding two others, the Saigon command announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 22 (AP) — The South Vietnamese Government today offered to release 600 disabled North Vietnamese prisoners of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Aug. 22 (AP) — About a third of Saigon's 43 newspapers did not publish today in protest against President Nguyen Van Thieu's new press law.

To the Editor:
MINNEAPOLIS, Aug. 23, (UPI)—The Veterans of Foreign Wars have accused Jane Fonda. the actress, and the former Attorney General, Ramsey, Clark, of being “traitorous meddlers” in United States foreign policy and recommended that they be prosecuted.
Mr. Chairman, delegates to this convention, my fellow Americans:

ROME, Aug. 23 (AP)—The Vatican weekly newspaper said today that Senator George McGovern's election campaign helps North Vietnam and the Vietcong.


MOSCOW, Aug. 23 — The Soviet Union warned publicly today against attempts by Washington to put new interpretations on the strategic arms agreements signed here in May.
VIETIANE, Laos, Aug. 23 (AP) —Informed sources reported today that Government commandos parachuted on Monday onto the northern edge of the Plaine des Jarres in northern Laos as part of a week‐old attempt to gain back ground lost to the North Vietnamese last winter.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 23—You understand, of course, if you've been watching television from Miami Beach, that President Nixon has put an end to the war in Vietnam—“so bloody, so costly, so bitterly divisive,” says the Republican platform, when Mr. Nixon came to power.
PARIS, Aug. 23 (AP)—The chief delegates of the United States and North Vietnam will skip tomorrow's session of the Vietnam peace talks.
CHICAGO, Aug. 23—Senator George McGovern tempered his antiwar message with expressions of respect for the military as he knew it as he addressed a polite but largely silent national convention of the American Legion here today.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 23 (AP) —Attorney General Richard G. Kleindienst said today that he doubted that anyone, including former Attorney General Ramsey Clark and Jane Fonda, the actress, would be prosecuted under a law forbidding any American except the President from dealing with a foreign power.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 23 —President Nixon opened his campaign for re‐election hero tonight by summoning the nation, and particularly the young, the old and disaffected Democrats, “to join our new majority.”
WASHINGTON—Meeting in national convention at Louisville, Ky., early in August, the American party, founded four years ago by supporters of Gov. George Wallace, nominated me as its candidate for President of the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Aug. 25 (AP)—A South Vietnamese regimental commander and at least one of his battalion commanders have been arrested for their part in the loss of the Queson valley last weekend, military officials reported yesterday.
President Nixon's acceptance speech to the Republican National Convention was an extraordinary address for an incumbent to deliver. Instead of expounding the accomplishments of his own Administration and explaining how he plans to extend and improve upon them the next four years, Mr. Nixon devoted most of his energies to calling upon the electorate to fear Senator McGovern and the Democrats.
HONG KONG, Aug. 24 —China said today that it had lodged a strong protest with the United States over what it described as an attack by American aircraft against a lifeboat of a Chinese merchant ship, resulting in the death of the ship's captain, a deputy political commissar and three seamen.


SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 24 (AP) — South Vietnamese combat deaths reported by Saigon in the 20 weeks of the North Vietnamese offensive exceed 10 per cent of the acknowledged toll for more than a decade of the Indochina war.
To the Editor: Sonic members of the Jewish community oppose Senator McGovern because they mistrust his expressions of support for Israel. How can anyone who opposes our military involvement in Vietnam, so the rationale goes, be relied upon to give military support to Israel if, as and when it is needed?
WASHINGTON — Chivalry in warfare, I suppose, is an antiquated concept. Such notions are impossible for a B‐52 bomber crew five miles up in the sky. The targets they drop their bombs upon are like grid squares on a map; they bear no physical resemblance to real cities and farms inhabited by real people. Now the crew hardly even have to concern themselves with accuracy; their “smart bombs” are carried on laser beams. It is called “surgical” bombing but is not so “surgical” as to spare the schools and hospitals, and the men, women and children who happen to be in the target areas.
MIAMI BEACH, Aug. 24—Vice President Agnew drew the outlines of the Republican campaign here today, sketching for himself the stance of an issueoriented platform advocate but reserving the right to resume his role as the party's oratorical aggressor.
PAWS, Aug. 24 (Reuters)—The North Vietnamese delegation to the peace talks here rejected today a South Vietnamese offer to free 600 pick and wounded prisoners of war. Hanoi's deputy chief of delegation, Nguyen Minh Vy, described the Saigon offer as a “well‐known tactic.”
To the Editor: Ramsey Clark's criticism of the Administration on his recent fact‐finding mission to North Vietnam has encountered a barrage of criticism from expected sources. You showed commendable journalistic courage in supporting the substance of Mr. Clark's statement (editorial Aug. 17). It is unfortunate, however, that your editorial diluted your praise by questioning Mr. Clark's judgment, not for what he said, but because of where he said it, to wit, North Vietnam. I find your criticism of doubtful logic.
To the Editor: What a golden opportunity Ramsey Clark, Jane Fonda, et al., missed when in. Hanoi, if they really wanted the bombing stopped. They could have exerted pressure on Hanoi to withdraw their invading troops from the South, which would mean immediate stopping of the bombing.
To the Editor: I have just re‐read your editorial in The Times of Aug 17: “Ramsey Clark in Hanoi.” I can recall no occasion, after upwards of seventy years, when you were so mistaken. Ramsey Clark was right in publicly criticizing “American war policies” in Hanoi, rather than in Washington. Hanoi is not the enemy.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 24 —Well‐placed Pentagon officials report that United States fighter‐bombers, in an effort to choke off the flow of war supplies to North Vietnam, have attacked railroad bridges within 25 miles of the Chinese border on a handful of occasions over the last four months.
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 24 (AP)—Representative John G. Schmitz of California, Presidential nominee of the American party, said today that the “unsung issue” of the Vietnam war was that “the United States and its NATO allies are furnishing both sides.” He said the North Vietnamese and Vietcong was effort was fueled by the Soviet Union's military output, which, he said, is in turn supplied by the “military‐industrial complex of the United States and its NATO allies.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 25—Reacting to the heavy losses suffered last Saturday by the South Vietnamese Army's Second Division when it lost the Queson district south of Danang, the Saigon high command has relieved the division's commander, according to American officials here.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 25—The Pentagon confirmed today that on occasion United States warplanes have been given permission to bomb targets in North Vietnam close to the China border.
WASHINGTON—The American public is entitled to know what the President's current plan is to end the war in Vietnam. As the election campaign heats up, Henry Kissinger has held highly publicized secret talks in Paris and in Saigon. An impression that real progress toward peace is being made is being created. Secretary Rogers personally predicts peace before the end of the year. Yet nothing has been disclosed of the substance of these talks and therefore it is impossible to judge whether realistic’ offers are being made or whether the flurry of activity is just part of the effort to re‐elect the President.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 25 (UPI) — The United States command said today that it had no evidence that a 30‐foot boat sunk by American warplanes off the North Vietnamese coast was a lifeboat from a Chinese merchant ship.


OKLAHOMA CITY, Aug. 25—An Army sergeant who refused to testify at the trial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. in connection with the mass killings at Mylai said today that he ;new willing to testify at any ;new trial.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Aug. 26—The district capital of Queson, overrun by North Vietnamese forces last weekend, was reportedly retaken yesterday by South Vietnamese troops.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 26 —Policemen here are now authorized to fire three warning shots to stop cars and motorcycles whose drivers they wish to question, according to la police spokesman. If the warning fails, he said, the policemen are authorized to shoot to kill.
MOUNTAINVIEW, Calif., Aug. 25—Eight years ago when Nguyen Ton Hoan went to work in Saigon, everyone he passed noticed his shiny chauffeur‐driven limousine and the armed bodyguards who rode with hint Then, Dr. Hoan was Deputy Premier of South Vietnam. Now each morning he and his wife drive unnoticed the few miles from their home to the little Vietnamese restaurant they operate here.
After photographing the war in Vietnam from 1967 through 1971, Welshman Philip Jones Griffiths is an angry man. His magnificent and heartrending pictures in “Vietnam Inc.” (cloth, Macmillan, $7.95; paper, Collier Books, $3.95) testify to his horror at the corruption and the killing and his compassion for the victims. He is appalled at what he sees as the stupidity of the policies that have kept Vietnam a battleground and destroyed its people—their traditions and their countryside. Photographs like the above and on the cover of this issue are accompanied by a text and captions that further reveal his bitterness: “'Motivating’ the American soldier to fight was cause of great concern. One view was that they should be made to stay until the war was won. Considering what carnage was caused by somewhat lazy and good‐humored G.I.'s the Vietnamese people can only be thankful for their lack of ‘motivation.’ His observations and the conclusions he has reached are subjective where Miss FitzGerald's are objective, yet they are so similar to hers that “Vietnam Inc.” makes a logical companion volume to “Fire in the Lake.”
Cyrus R. Vance, the former deputy secretary of defense and envoy to the Paris peace talks au Vietnam, and Mrs. Mathilde run, ?? and author, were ??amed yesterday to head Sen??tor George McGovern's drive for campaign funds in this State.
Frances FitzGerald's “Fire in the Lake: The Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam,” reviewed on Page 1 by Stanley Hoffmann this week, is dedicated “To the memory of my father and Paul Mus.” As Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, the late Desmond FitzGerald briefed Defense Secretary McNamara on Vietnam intelligence each week. He once stopped McNamara as he was scribbling down facts and figures, and asked if he might venture a personal opinion. The situation would get worse, FitzGerald said, despite the official optimism in all the charts and computer printouts. Startled, McNamara asked for reasons. FitzGerald replied that it was an intuition, based on his experience. McNamara was appalled, and FitzGerald did not brief McNamara again.
Cyrus R. Vance, the former deputy secretary of defense and envoy to the Paris peace talks on Vietnam, and Mrs. Mathilde Krim, scientist and author, were named yesterday to head Senator George McGovern's drive for campaign funds in this state.
In what was probably the most proficiently controlled and smoothly contrived national convention in American political history, the Republican party last week went through the formality of renominating Richard M. Nixon for President and Spiro T. Agnew for Vice President the United States, and of adopting a platform and party rules tailor‐made in the White House.
To the Editor: The real significance of the Indochina war has never been a question of money, as the Pentagon's “The Economics of Defense Spending” now implies (news story Aug. 11), for even if the Nixon Administration could gratuitously inflict the misery it has visited on the Indochinese people could not make the war one iota less abominable. But the Pentagon's release of highly dubious figures it insisted on classifying “secret” until now smacks of the crudest election‐year politics.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Aug. 27 (AP)—Heavy fighting was reported in and around the provincial capital of Quangtri yesterday, while more than 100 miles to the south Government units reported continuing progress in their efforts to recapture the strategic Queson Valley.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 26—American officials report that the rate of civilian casualties in the war in South Vietnam has increased more than 100 per cent since th& current enemy offensive began March 31
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 26—“My mother wrote to me and said, ‘If you ain't over there, why aren't you here?’ “ said Specialist 4 John. Walling, an infantryman from Lexington, Ky.
To the Editor: I commend The Times for its editorial of Aug. 9 entitled “Crossfire in the Senate.” However, it is interesting that no mention is made of the names of those “liberal Senators in the forefront of the outcry against killing in Vietnam, yet chose to close their eyes to the opportunities they are providing for equally senseless killing right at home.”
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, Aug. 26 (UPI)—A China Air lines C‐123 transport on charter to Air America, the United States Government contract airline in Southeast Asia, crashed today, killing all eight persons aboard, an Air America spokesman said. The cause of the crash six miles south of Pleiku was not known. Those aboard included a four‐man Chinese crew, an American, a Filipino and two South Vietnamese, the spokesman said. The names of most of the dead were not immediately available, but the spokesman said that the pilot was Capt. T. F. Lee of Taipei, Taiwan.
NEW ORLEANS, Aug. 26 (UPI)—Labor Secretary James D. Hodgson told a veterans group today that Senator George McGovern was playing politics with American prisoners of war and advocated a path of military weakness that “is a prescription for disaster” for the United States.
Fire in the lake is the image for revolution in the Chinese Book of Changes, the I Ching, and it's the title of this extraordinary book by Frances FitzGerald. Miss FitzGerald, a young American freelance writer who has spent much time in Vietnam during the past six years, has written partly a history of South Vietnam, partly a study of American policy there, and partly an account of what this policy has done to a people we have destroyed in order to save from Communism. “Fire in the Lake” is all these and much more: a compassionate and penetrating account of the collision of two societies that remain untranslatable to one another, an analysis of all those features of South Vietnamese culture that doomed the American effort from the start, and an incisive explanation of the reasons why that effort could only disrupt and break down South Vietnam's society—and pave the way for the revolution that the author sees as the only salvation.
To the Editor: The negotiation of a peace agreement in Vietnam would be vastly improved if a bipartisan approach were employed by Senator George McGovern during the Presidential campaign. The need for peace in Indochina is far greater than continuing the issue of the Vietnam war as central to the campaign.
SAIGON—On June 19, President Nguyen Van Thieu made a speech vowing that within three months South Vietnam's armed forces would recapture all the territory that fell to the North Vietnamese in the Communist offensive that began March 30. This gives Mr. Thieu three more weeks to fulfill his promise. If Vietnamese gamblers made book on this kind of thing, the odds would be one million to one against it.
To the Editor: The most astonishing revelation in the history of international diplomacy must be the confessions of the Vance, Harriman and Shriver triumvirate admitting that during the summer of 1968 they had peace in Indochina right in the palms of their hands and not only failed to act on the North Vietnamese offer but neglected to inform their President, Mr. Johnson, or the American people through their press. This duplicity should be investigated by Congress.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 26 (AP)—‐Phan My Truc, editor of a pro‐Government newspaper who urged other editors to cooperate with tough new press laws, was shot and killed today by an unidentified assassin who escaped on a motorbike. Police sources said preliminary investigation did not disclose a motive for the slaying in a restaurant near Mr. Truc's office.
SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 20—The flights from Saigon and Danang reach California in 18 hours, telescoping night into day and into night again, and the big jet transports drop out of the gloom of the Pacific sky to land at Travis Air Force Base as another sunrise rims the high peaks of the Sierra Nevada range far to the east.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 27 (AP)—The North Vietnamese have freed four French priests captured in the Central Highlands in April. They seemed in good spirits and showed no signs of abuse, an informant said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 27—The South Vietnamese; Government announced today that three more Saigon daily newspapers had been confiscated for violating the new press code and that their publishers would be prosecuted.
WASHINGTON—When the President stated on April 30, July 3 and July 27 that United States bombing policy was to avoid targeting of North Vietnamese dikes, he meant exactly that, and his orders are lucidly understood and scrupulously enforced all along the military chain of command.
HONG KONG, Aug. 27—China took issue today with a statement by the United States command in Saigon over the alleged sinking of a lifeboat from a Chinese merchant ship by American aircraft off North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 27 (AP)—Rear Adm. Mark W. Woods has taken command of the United States Pacific Fleet's cruiser‐destroyer force, the Navy announced today. The force, which includes 124 ships and 40,000 men, has its headquarters in San Diego. About a third of its ships are in Vietnamese waters.
To the Editor.
SAIGON South Vietnam Aug. 28, Reuters—The sprawling United States military base at Long Binh near Saigon once the largest outside the United States—will be handed over to the South Vietnamese Government within two months, the Vietnam Press ;News Agency reported today.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Aug. 28 (Reuters)—The Western White House said today that President Nixon would make another announcement on troop levels in Vietnam before flying on Wednesday to Honolulu for two days of talks with Premier Kakuei Tanaka of Japan.
TOKYO, Aug. 28 (AP)—The North Vietnamese Government held a memorial ceremony Sunday in Hanoi to “pay last respects to the five Chinese seamen killed in the United States bombing of a Chinese merchant ship Aug. 22” a Peking broadcast reported today.
NEW ORLEANS, Aug. 28 (AP) —The American Veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam have backed President Nixon in his opposition to amnesty for anyone fleeing the country to avoid military service. The resolution passed as the group's 28th annual convention ended here yesterday.
President Nixon's announcement of a further 12,000man reduction in American troops in Vietnam by Dec. marks essential accomplishment of his primary objective: withdrawal of the half‐million American troops President Johnson sent there—without bringing down the Saigon Government. But the removal of combat units from South Vietnam itself unfortunately does not terminate American combat participation in the Indochina war. Nor—for that very reason—does it remove Vietnam as a major campaign issue, despite Mr. Nixon's conviction that it would do so.
WASHINGTON. Aug. 29 — When first started writing about Massachusetts politics. I interviewed Louis Lyons, then the head of the Nieman Foundation for newspapermen at Harvard.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Aug. 29—Following is the official White House transcript of President Nixon's news conference here today:
Senator George McGovern, campaigning here yesterday, said President Nixon's plan to cut United States troop strength in South Vietnam by 12,000 men endangered American servicemen remaining in the Southeast Asia country.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 29 (UPI)—Capt. Richard S. Ritchie of Reidsville, N.C., shot down a North Vietnamese MIG‐21 defending Hanoi yesterday to become the first United States Air Force ace of the Indochina war, the United Staes command said today.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 29—The Senate Armed Services Committee, after a series of delays, has decided to proceed next month with an extensive and critical look at the command and control structure of the Air Force.
PARIS, Aug. 29 (UPI) —North Vietnam today criticized as “insignificant” President Nixon's announcement of further troop withdrawals from Vietnam.
CLIFTON, N.J.—On Sunday, August Gth, eleven prisoners in the Federal Correctional Institution at Danbury, Conn., began a “water fast to the death to protest American atrocities in Indochina—our electronic battlefield, our mining of ports and rivers, our bombing of dikes and dams.” In a statement to the prison authorities and to the press they said, “We will end this fast when it becomes clear that the American people, the peace movement, and our servicemen have undertaken mature and responsible action to end genocide in Vietnam. Literally, we place our lives in the hands of our countrymen.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 29—A four‐ship American task force—with Vice Adm. J. L. Holloway 3d, the commander of the Seventh Fleet along—conducted a raid on the Haiphong port area after dark on Sunday, shelling targets within two miles of the Haiphong city limits, the Navy command announced here today.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Aug. 29 — The White House announced today that the American force in Vietnam would be reduced by 12,000 more men over the next three months.
SAIGON, Wednesday, Aug. 30 (AP)—North Vietnamese troops reportedly counterattacked last night and drove Government units off a 300‐foot hill commanding the eastern approaches to the embattled northern district capital of Queson.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 30 (UPI)—The Army awarded contracts totaling $153.2‐million today to the Boeing Company and Sikorsky Aircraft for development of a new, larger and more reliable troop‐carrying helicopter to replace the Huey troop carrier used in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Aug. Jo —i North Vietnam leveled scorn today at President Nixon's latest troop‐withdrawal announcement and declared once again that a Vietnam settlement was impossible until the United States ended both its support of the Saigon Government and its military actions against the ‘north.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 30—If the Presidential election of 1972 is to have a turning point, Senator George McGovern may have reached it this week. With the conventions over and the traditional Labor Day campaign inaugural at hand, the South Dakota Democrat has given evidence in the last two days that he is ready to begin an affirmative effort to close the long gap between himself and President Nixon. In the seven weeks since the Democratic convention which he was nominated, Mr. McGovern has seemed, friend and foe, like a man trying to run on ice. Not only the Eagleton episode, but such lesser developments the confusion over his indirect contacts with the North Vietnamese and his statement that the Saigon Government would have to flee if he won, he has given the impression, as a staff member put it, of “a guy who'd have a hard time running Peoria.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 30 — The South Vietnamese Government announced today that issues of three more daily newspapers had been seized for criticizing the Government and that a court had sentenced the alleged perpetrators of 60 other press violations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Thursday, Aug. 31—North Vietnamese gunners poured about 2,000 heavy‐caliber shells into South Vietnamese marine positions around the city of Quangtri in the last two days, and intense fighting was reported elsewhere in the northern province, the South Vietnamese command reported tcday.
Acknowledging that he has a “Jewish problem in New York.” Senator George McGovern yesterday urged an enthusiastic audience of rabbis and their families to “judge me today and in the weeks ahead on the basis of all my actions” and not “on the basis of what the opposition says, or prints, or whispers.”

PARIS, Aug. 31—Delegates to the Vietnam peace talks here blamed each other's sides today for the unending war and agreed to meet again next Thursday.
Eugene V. Rostow insists (letter Aug. 22) that the “real issue” about Vietnam in the campaign is that responsible leaders of opinion should not rewrite history. Ironically, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, 1966‐69, who served with Secretary of State Rusk, does indeed rewrite history when he contends that the nation committed itself to the Vietnam policy through the SEATO Treaty.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 31—Two weeks after Henry A. Kissinger's surprise visit to Saigon, high‐ranking American officials here are talking privately not of a breakthrough in the peace talks, but, rather, of the possibility of unending war.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 31 (AP)—A Thai police lieutenant was arrested today in connection with a June 15 plane explosion over South Vietnam that killed his 7‐year‐old daughter and 80 other persons. Police spokesmen said that he had heavily insured the child before the flight.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31 Senator George McGovern continued today to attempt to allay the fears of the United States’ allies that if he was elected President he would weaken the country's commitments abroad.
HONOLULU, Aug. 31—Premier Kakuei Tanaka may do most of the talking for the Japanese side during the summit conference here. But if President Nixon and his adviser for national security, Henry A. Kissinger, have been well briefed, they will not overlook the man at Mr. Tanaka's side, Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ohira, whose silence and sleepy look could be misleading. It has been Mr. Ohira, rather than Mr. Tanaka, who has been the architect of Japan's new China policy. The Foreign Minister is the planner of Japan's China strategy, the executor of her diplomatic tactics and the builder of the consensus required of all national decisions before they are put forward.
LELAND, Mich.—In two previous Vietnam articles on this page, I discussed the options open to President Nixon. Briefly they were: (1) get out of Vietnam, (2) continue stalemate, (3) escalate the war, (4) Vietnamization. After a visit to Vietnam, I discussed Mr. Nixon's adoption of the Vietnamization program. It has succeeded exceptionally well, to the extent that its objective is about to be reached with withdrawal of practically all U.S. ground forces from Vietnam and the assumption of their responsibilities by the South Vietnamese.
SAIGON, Aug. 31—The United States command said today that five Americans were killed in action and three wounded last week, in the lowest casualty toll of any week since record‐keeping began on Jan. 1, 1965.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31—The campaign debates on the economy and the war sound as if the two sides disagreed about almost everything, but you look at the human side of these two great questions, the fact is that they agree on a great many disagreeable facts.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31 (AP) —Tran Kim Phuong, Ambassador of South Vietnam, accused Senator George McGovern today of “bad manners” and “a gross violation of international courtesy” because of a statement he made yesterday about Nguyen Van Thieu, South Vietnam's president.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31—United States intelligence sources said today that a number of Soviet tankers had been unloading fuel and other petroleum products in Chinese ports in recent weeks, apparently to replace some of China's deliveries in North Vietnam through two new pipelines.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday. Sept. 1 (AP)—American air strikes against North Vietnam destroyed a huge ammunition dump Wednesday and set A fuel depot ablaze, the United States command reported yesterday.
LAOS, Aug. 31 (AP)‐‐A third Soviet cargo plane loaded with war material for North Vietnam has been diverted to the airport at Vientiane because the Hanoi airport was closed down by American bombing, Laotian officials said today. The plane, like the others, had been temporarily grounded by Laotian authorities because its manifest did not list arms.
HONOLULU, Aug. 31—President Nixon and Premier Kakuci Tanaka of Japan began a two‐day meeting here today in an effort to revitalize the United States’ troubled alliance with Japan.
CARBONDALE, Ill., Aug. 31 (UN) — Senator Thomas F. Eagleton said today that he thought it would have been preferable if Ramsey Clark had not gone to Hanoi and Pierre Salinger had not met with the North Vietnames delegation to the Paris peace talks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Sept. 2—The Hanoi radio announced this morning that three American pilots held as prisoners of war would be released on the occasion of North Vietnam's National Day today.
The Rev. Paul Mayer said yesterday that he had lost 30, pounds since Aug. 6 on a wateronly fast and was prepared to lose more “if it helps to bring an end to the war in Indochina.”
HONG KONG, Sept. 1—Communist China is not saying whom it favors in the American Presidential election but North Vietnam is backing Senator George McGovern.
WASHINGTON, Saturday, Sept. 2—The three Americans whose imminent release was announced today were previously known to have been prisoners of war in North Vietnam all three of them had been seen by American antiwar activists during visits to North Vietnam.
Daniel Ellsberg appeared in Miami Beach during the Republican convention, an unwelcome ghost. He produced for the press copies of a memorandum prepared at the end of 1968, at Henry Kissinger's request, for President‐elect Nixon. The paper, done by a private group of experts under Ellsberg's chairmanship, set out the possible options for a new administration in Vietriam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Sept. 2 (AP)—A South Vietnamese task force set out yesterday to recapture a former regimental command post in the Queson valley south of Danang, but reportedly ran into heavy enemy fire about 400 yards outside it.
A new Gallup poll shows that 29 per cent of the people questioned in a recent survey favor a government in South Vietnam run solely by South Vietnamese after the United States troop withdrawal is completed.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Sept. 2 (UPI)—President Nixon is “pleased” to learn that North Vietnam is planning to release three prisoners of war, it was announced last night.
President Nixon's pledge to eliminate the draft, if reelected, may go down in history—along with his vow to E. id the Vietnam war—as the twentieth century's most ingenious contribution to the art of electioneering: the “two‐campaign promise.” Mr. Nixon ran successfully on that platform in 1968. Now, with the target date for draft‐free army set for July 1973, he is campaigning on the same promise again.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 2 — Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam has made a major speech that American analysts here describe as “uncompromising” in its insistence that the fight continue for a settlement of the war on the Communists terms.
PARIS, Sept. 2—Two leaders of the American peace movement said today that they would fly to Hanoi soon to escort three American prisoners of war back to the United States.
MOSCOW, Sept. 2—The tempo of anti‐American propaganda in the Soviet press has risen sharply in recent days from the restrained period of President Nixon's visit here, when the mining of Haiphong harbor went unmentioned for 21 days.
WASHINGTON — President Nixon's celebrated but never really stated four‐year “plan” to resolve the nation's agony in Vietnam was, in fact, a three‐tiered strategy aimed at that pivotal day of reckoning, Nov. 7, 1972. As Election Day nears, only one of those tiers has actually been reached, but the President appears to have been right in calculating that this would suffice to mollify the voters.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Sept. 3 (AP)—North and South Vietnamese troops fought north of Saigon Friday and yesterday, and preliminary reports from the field indicated that there were heavy casualties on both sides.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Sept. 2—The Army, completing its administrative measures in connection with the Mylai killings four years ago, formally reprimanded a colonel and a captain today and ordered a sergeant ousted from the service.
To the Editor: To put peaceful pressure on Greece to move away from military dictatorship would be “the ultimate arrogance of power,” according to Secretary of State Rogers. To kill, maim and injure hundreds of thousands of helpless Vietnamese by bombing, on the other hand, is presumably not arrogant, indeed perhaps just the ultimate humanity of beneficent power (in Mr. Rogers’ world). Here, laid bare, is evidence of the keen observation made by Solzhenitsyn in his Nobel lecture (news story Aug. 25):
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Sept. 4 (AP)—President Nguyan Van Thieu has ordered the death penalty for hijacking, armed robbery and rape and has suspended military justice, the official Government press agency announced today.
A man in upstate New York, concerned about American planes bombing the dikes in North Vietnam, wrote a letter recently to President Nixon. He got an answer from the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, John Richardson Jr. As an example of contemporary official logic it deserves a wider audience.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 3 (Agence France‐Presse) — Two of the three American pilots who are to be released from North Vietnamese prisons have purportedly issued antiwar statements and an appeal to the American people and Congress to “take firm, positive action” to end the fighting.
To the Editor: Some corrective ought to be applied to Jefferson B. Fordham's statement of moral outrage over Vietnam (letter, Aug. 23). It is never pleasant to take issue with an expression of sincere and high moral concern, even when as in.the present case it does smack bit of a certain moral arrogance and moral distortion.
TOKYO, Sept. 3—Several seemingly trivial incidents in which Japanese leftists stopped the movement of American militarr tanks here have caused American authorities to become noticeably impatient with the continued harassment and the apparent reluctance of the Japanese Government to provide the protection that would allow American forces to move equipment unimpeded.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 4 (Reuters) — United States troop strength in South Vietnam dropped by 600 to reach 37,100 at the end of last week, the American command in Saigon reported today.
PARIS, Sept. 4 (Reuters)—Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's chief negotiator of the Paris peace talks, said today that there would be no further release of United States prisoners of war after the forthcoming release of three pilots unless the peace talks showed some definite progress.
ALEXANDRIA, Va. — Two things predictably will be awaiting us around the next bend in history whenever formal warfare ends in Indochina. One is that the Politburo still will be ruling in Hanoi. The other is that the basic issue of the war, the question of whether the people on that battleground are to live in a closed society or an open society, will have remained unresolved. These two piobabilities, combined, are going to generate problems, in the future for every thinking American.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Sept. 4—A busy fortnight of Presidential barnstorming will come to an end tomorrow when President Nixon pays a brief visit to San Francisco and then heads for home. But in the two short weeks since he left Miami with his party's renomination Mr. Nixon has already provided im
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Sept. 5—Government soldiers lost a base camp near the Cambodian border in the Central Highlands yesterday in the heaviest enemy attack on that front since the height of the offensive in Kontum in April and May.
CHIPPEWA LAKE, Ohio, Sept. 4—Senator George McGo fern opened the official phase of his national campaign in this key industrial state with a promise to bring “the real George McGovern to the people.”
An injunction was issued in Federal Court here yesterday to bar political activities by committee seeking to impeach President Nixon for his conduct of the war in Vietnam.
To the Editor:
Fifteen participants in a “prisoners' march for peace” that began in Danbury, Conn., arrived here yesterday and ended an eight‐day fast with juice and soup.
WASHINGTON—Not only is November the month for the U.S. election, but more important to North Vietnam, it is the time for harvesting the most important crop of the year. The, dike issue will therefore be employed by Hanoi for dual purposes: to influence public opinion abroad and to justify poor agricultural performance at home.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Sept. 6 (AP)—North Vietnamese forces attacked South Vietnamese militia outpost in the Central Highlands yesterday only 12 miles southwest of Pleiku but were repulsed, the Saigon command reported.
MOSCOW, Sept. 5—Mr. Kissinger's scheduled visit to Moscow was reported without elaboration by Tass, the Soviet press agency, as the press criticized both the United States and Japan on continuation of the Vietnam war.
PEKING, Sept. 5 (Reuters)—Seriior North Vietnamese offidais have hinted that the Indochina war could possibly end before or shortly after the American Presidential election in November, travelers back froin Hanoi said here today.
PARIS—To the long controversy between critics of U.S. bombing of North Vietnamese dikes and the American Administration, it is now possible to add new elements to the available evidence. They are the result of a geographical analysis of the points in the dike network that have been hit by bombs.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 5—As sociate Justice William O. Douglas ordered the release on bail today of four members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War who have been held since Aug. 9 for refusing to testify before a Federal grand jury in Tallahassee, Fla.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 5 (Reuters)—Gen. Vu Van Giai, who ordered his troops to retreat from Quangtri during the North Vietnamese offensive in April, is to face a court‐martial soon, the official agency Vietnam Press reported today.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Sept. 5—The White House announced today that Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security, would visit the Soviet Union Sept. 10 to Sept. 13 for talks with Soviet leaders, including the Communist party leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev, and Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin.
SEOUL, South Korea, Thursday, Sept. 7. (UPI) —South Korea will withdraw all of its 37,000 soldiers from South Vietnam starting in December, a high‐ranking Foreign Ministry official said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 6—The South Vietnamese Government, by executive decree; has abolished popular democratic election of officials at the most basic level—in the country's 10, 775 hamlets.
FORT ORD, calif., Sept. 6—A black draftee went on trial In a court‐martial here today, accused of premeditated murder in the deaths of two white officers killed by a hand grenade as they slept in their bunks at Bienhoa Army base in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Sept. 7 (AP)—More fighting was reported yesterday in the Central ‘Highlands, with North Vietnamese troops attacking within seven miles of the city of Pleiku.
To the Editor: If Mr. Peterson's mission was, as you have, I think, correctly deduced in a recent editorial, to make it clear to the Soviet Government that the chief political precondition to any major expansion of Soviet‐American trade and any major extension of U.S. credits to the Soviet Union is “genuine Soviet aid in ending the Vietnam war,” i.e., on the disingenuous terms proposed by President Nixon, which have been totally rejected by the. Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and by the South Vietnamese National Liberation Front; ‘it is not surprising that it has proved’ a failure.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 6—The South Vietnamese Government announced today that a Saigon court had fined 48 newspaper and magazine publishers for violations of the press law.
To the Editor: Faced with the cold‐blooded demagoguery and hypocrisy of “this great President” who is so confident, of his re‐election, one is left with a sense of utter despair. Not only is he arrogantly claiming to be “on God's side,” but he is also exploiting, for his demagogic purposes, the deep anguish and suffering of a little Russian girl with shameless false sincerity. “She was a beautiful child. Her name was Tanya. I read ‘her diary. It tells the terrible story of war.... And finally, these were the last words in her diary: ‘All are dead, only Tanya is left.’ Let us think of Tanya and of the other Tanyas and their brothers and sisters every. where in Russia and’ China and in America as we proudly meet our responsibilities for leadership in the world in a way worthy of a great people.”
ORLANDO, Fla., Sept: 6—A Young Air Force sergeant who first reported the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam took issue today with the Air Force contention that Gen. John D. Lavelle acted alone and said more than 200 Men were involved in falsely reporting the raids.
To the Editor: The President stresses the point that he is “getting us out of Vietnam.” From Pearl Harbor to V‐J Day, the United States fought and won World War II. That took three years, eight months, and one week. Mr. Nixon has been President for three years, seven months, and one week. The Nixon disengagement has taken over 20,000 American lives and tens of billions of dollars.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 7—The State Department said today that the United States had been neither consulted nor informed by South Vietnam of its decision to abolish popular elections for officials in countryside hamlets.

WASHINGTON, Sept. 7—James R. Hoffa, the former president of the teamsters union, planned to leave tonight for Hanoi to try to bring about the release of American prisoners of war, but he canceled the trip, at least temporarily, this morning.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Sept. —Four antiwar veterans, jailed last month for refusing to testify before a Federal grand jury, were released on their own recognizance today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Sept. 8—North Vietnamese troops have reportedly taken control of most of the key district town of Tienphuoc in Quangtin Province about 35 miles south of Danang.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 7 (UPI)—One American was killed in action last week, the lowest death toll since single United States soldier died in the week ended last Christmas, the United States command said today.
The abolition of popular elections in South Vietnam's 10,775 hamlets by the stroke of an executive order from Saigon once again underscores the futility of the war and the fatuousness—in today's context—of professed American war aims. The blood of hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese and American soldiers and the suffering, of millions of civilians have been rationalized by lofty commitments to assure for the South Vietnamese people the right to democratic self‐government. In explaining his war policy, President Nixon has insisted that when the United States leaves Vietnam, it must be “in a way that gives the South Vietnamese a reasonable chance to survive as a free people.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 7—Of the last five Presidential elections; the Republicans have won three, mainly on foreign policy issues. General Eisenhower won in 1952 and 1956, not only because he,was immensely, popular but because he was regarczed as man of peace, and experience in the foreign field. Richard. Nixon won in 1968 largely because of Vietnam, and this helps explain his strategy for re‐election.
PARIS, Sept. 7—William J. Porter, the chief United States representative at the Paris peace talks, warned Hanoi once more today against hoping to achieve political ends in Saigon by military means. The Communist side once again took the position that continued American; bombing of North ?? ‘Proof of American ?? to end the war.
WASHINGTON, Sept, 7—A few days after James Riddle Hoffa was released from a Federal penitentiary last Dec. 23, he was on the phone ordering suits ‘and. hoes with the concentration and energy that he once used in negotiating contracts.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 7— L. Patrick Gray 3’, the acting director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has departed from the nonpolitical practices of his predecessor, J. Edgar Hoover, by making a series of speeches that follow key points in the political line of the incumbent Administration.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 7—Congressional sources reported today that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had detected at least one of Gen. John D. Lavelle's unauthorized bombing missions against North Vietnam in 1971, well before the series of raids ended.
Richard Compton's "Welcome Home, Soldier Boys," which opened very modestly at neighborhood theaters yesterday, is a largely unsuccessful, occasionally grotesque, but by no means dishonorable attempt to deal with some of the texture of rootless American life at the present time.It goes wrong—quite dreadfully wrong—in its more mechanically spectacular moments. But it seems right when it is content to roam around the towns and highways of the West and Southwest, moving all but aimlessly toward what should have been a small-scale doom.The soldier boys in question are four veterans, Green Berets, who are discharged from the Army in Arkansas, jointly buy a big black second-hand Cadillac, and set off for California to start raising cattle on land that one of them is supposed to own, but that is in fact no more than a photograph on a picture postcard. Along the way they alternately victimize and are victimized.They pick up, use, and possibly kill a tough girl hitchhiker (they never bother to see what happens when she falls out of their speeding car). They visit one boy's home, and move on, growing more desperate, and poorer. Finally, out of money and out of gas, they erupt into violence—totally destroying a tiny New Mexico town that is all too obviously a surrogate Vietnamese village—and absurdly simplifying a movie that could have taken something better.Each of the boys has a certain edgy individuality, and their leader, Danny (Joe Don Baker) seems genuinely complex with his imposing slouch, his defiant eyes and mumbled speech. Indeed, I am not sure but that what impressed me most about him was my being unable to make out more than a third of his dialogue—and feeling that all that inarticulate talk was an expressive part of a characterization.But it is as a road movie that "Welcome Home, Soldier Boys" really comes into its own. Five minutes here, 10 minutes there, motel scenes at night, or driving through the early morning—scenes that don't finally co-here but that do stand out for a kind of lyricism and reticence and subtlety of observation. There is a quality of emptiness and random pathos to the film that is ultimately rather lovely, and that belongs as much to the spirit of American movie making as it does to the spirit of American life.This doesn't add up to a good movie, but it adds up to a sporadically interesting one—in which the failure of the whole is no measure of some of the parts.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 8 (AP) — Informed sources said today that elements of American‐supported Laotian irregular forces were forced to withdraw under heavy fire last Tuesday, abandoning an offensive operation against the North Vietnamese‐held Plaine des Jarres in northern Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Sept. 9—The Saigon command reported yesterday that South Vietnamese troops had abandoned an embattled district capital south of Danang, but a spokesman said early today that fighting apparently was still under way inside the town.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 8—Attorney General Richard G. Kleindienst said today that James R. Hoffa's lawyer had suggested a deal under which Hoffa would be allowed to return to union activities if he won the release of some‐American prisoners of war from North Vietnam.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Sept. 8 — A Senate‐House conference committee today scrapped an endthe‐war amendment that the Senate had attached to a military procurement bill requiring the withdrawal of all American forces from Indochina in four months.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Sept. 8 —Federal District Judge David L. Middlebrooks Jr. ordered today the jailing of another recalcitrant witness on contempt charges for refusing to testify before a Federal grand jury investigating an alleged plot by antiwar veterans to disrupt the Republican National Convention last month.
To the Editor: Your editorial of Aug. 17 on Ramsey Clark's visit to Hanoi exhibited the “poor judgment” that you attribute to him. As any visitor to North Vietnam will confirm, the experience is a compelling one in human terms. To turn aside in silence from such desolation would require the most callous and self‐interested state of mind.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 8 (UPI) — The first victim of the minefields placed around North Vietnam by United States Navy planes may have been a United Navy ship, a Pentagon spokesman indicated today.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 8—Senator William Proxmire made public a letter today from four Air Force intelligence sergeants who asserted that officers of the Seventh Air Force made “a concerted effort” early this year “to cover up all traces” of an accidental bombing of civilian targets in Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 8—A defector from the North Vietnamese Army said today that his unit had gunned down civilian men, women and children and South Vietnamese soldiers without discrimination as they fled south from Quangtri City in late April and early May.
WASHINGTON Sept. 9—The Pentagon took issue today with Senator William Proxmire. Democrat of Wisconsin, who yesterday made public a letter accusing Air Force officers of covering up the accidental bombing of civilian targets in Cambodia.
MUNICH, West Germany. Sept. 9 (Agence France‐Presse) —Arnie Robinson, bronze medalist in the men's long jump at the Olympics today, wore an anti ‐Vietnam War armband when he stepped up to receive his medal. The United States jumper's track suit carried an emblem of three bombs with a red line through them, a symbol seen on several United States track suits at the Games.
OKLAHOMA CITY, Sept. 9 (UPI)—Rob Risner was 17 years old when his father, a hero of both the Korean and Vietnamese wars, leaped from a flaming fighter‐bomber into Communist hands.
To THE EDITOR: I now know that Gene Thornton's reviews have nothing to do with photographic impact or artistic judgment. I took his critical review literally and almost missed the David D. Duncan show at the Whitney. Fortunately, your mailbag made me curious enough to step off the Whitney elevator into an exhibition of visual excitement—a stunning display of black and white and color blow‐ups.
MOSCOW, Sept. 9—Le Duct Tho, North Vietnam's chief negotiator in a series of secret talks with Henry A. Kissinger, flew into Moscow tonight on the eve of Mr. Kissinger's scheduled arrival here for talks with Soviet leaders.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 9—The American military command and South Vietnamese headquarters are conducting a lively debate about how best to contend with the possibility that the Communists will initiate new military moves in the Saigon area.
SEOUL South Korea, Sept. 9—About 100 disabled South Korean veterans of the Vietnam war demonstrated at the Japanese Embassy here today, rigorously protesting a recent supplement or a Japanese newspaper that they said had defamed them.
Starting with his own re‐election as an unopposed candidate last October, President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam has taken a series of steps to centralize power in his hands—thus diminishing the democratic processes—at a time when the United States is pulling out troops and, correspondingly, losing influence there. The major steps are shown below.
Family members of the three American prisoners who arc being released by North Vietnam will be flown to Hanoi on ednesday night to pick them up.
To the Editor: The Times characterization of President Nixon's Republican Convention acceptance speech as an exercise in partisan demagoguery (“Call to Fear” Aug. 25) seems to smack of sour grapes. Mr. Nixon hardly could be expected to echo.the familiar litany of the doctrinaire liberal. He spoke instead for the decisive majority of Americans who quite plainly are fed up with an elitist minority which seeks to reshape America in its own image.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Sept. 10 (UPI)—An Air Force fighter ‐bomber crewman from Louisiana became America's fourth air ace of the Vietnam war yesterday, shooting down his fifth MIG in a dogfight near Hanoi, the United States command reported.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 9 (AP)—Two South Vietnamese legislators have called for a Government inquiry into what they charge was the massacre of 29 civilians by South Korean troops on July 31.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 9—The political crisis in Cambodia's capital deepened today as news was received that North Vietnamese forces had captured the important district capital called Kampong Trabek.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 9—The spokesman for the Department of Defense, Jerry W. Freidheim. issued a statement today opposing travel by families of prisoners of war to North Viet‘nam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Sept. 10 (AP) — A Vietcong demolition squad reportedly attacked South Vietnam's biggest refugee camp yesterday, taking a heavy toll in life and property.
A panel of 200 business leaders and university presidents has urged the removal of virtually all restrictions on nonmilitary trade with the Soviet Union, China and other Eastern‐bloc countries, except North Vietnam, North Korea and Cuba.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 10 (Agence France‐Presse) —Dien Tin, the main opposition newspaper, announced today that it was suspending publication.
MOSCOW, Sept. 10—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser, arrived here tonight for talks with the Soviet leadership, as Moscow ‘gave renewed though routine assurances of support for Hanoi to North Vietnam's top negotiator.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Sept. 11—The United States Embassy here has found attacks on Senator George McGovern on the South Vietnamese national television and radio so offensive that it has protested to the Saigon Government, according to an embassy spokesman.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Sept. 11 (AP)—Two of South Vietnam's biggest air bases, the Tansonnhut field just, outside Saigon and the base at Bienhoa, 15 miles northeast of the capital, came under attack yesterday.
An Associated Press dispatch from Saigon Sept. 3 included this passage:
WASHINGTON, Sept. 10—Abram L. Chayes, a Harvard professor and chairman of Senator George McGovern's foreign policy advisory panel, has denied controversial views attributed to him in the Sept. 11 issue of Newsweek.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 10—Representative Ogden R. Reid warned today that the situation in Northern Ireland threatened to become a “British Vietnam” and urged the United States to offer its “good offices in some area.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 11 (Reuters)—Laotian troops drove North Vietnamese soldiers from the town of Khong Sedone in southern Laos over the weeknd, a Government spokesman said here today. Gen. Thong1phanh Knoksy said that the Government troops had recaptured the town after fierce fighting. He did not say how many casualties the Laotian force suffered. Khong Sedone lies at the foot of the Boloven Plateau, 30 miles north of Pakse.
Senator George McGovern would have us pull out of Vietnam immediately, and hope that the North Vietnamese would be good boys, and release our P.O.W.'s, as he claims they did with the French. The sad truth is that the North Vietnamese only released 11,000 out of the 37,000 French P.O.W.'s they held.
According to the Republican National Committee (RNC) and the Committee to Re‐Elect the President (CREEP), their files do not support the widespread belief that candidate Nixon in 1968 claimed a “secret plan” to end the Vietnam war. Inasmuch as they are better known for rummaging around in other people's files than producing facts from their own, gladly offer the following to save the locks on my doors.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 11—Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle, in what some Senators considered a change of testimony, told the Senate Armed Services Committee today that he had “committed no wrong” in connection with the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam for which he was dismissed from the Air Force.
A Louis Harris poll of voters made public yesterday showed that 55 per cent supported con‐, tinued heavy bombing of North Vietnam, while 32 per cent opposed it.
MOSCOW, Sept. 11—Henry Kissinger began three days of wide‐ranging talks with the Soviet leadership today without making any contact here with the North Vietnamese negotiator, Le Duc Tho.
President Nixon has taken American ground combat troops out of the war and therefore American casualties are down, but American war prisoners are nowhere near freedom, “Vietnamization” has never looked more dubious, the Thieu regime has never seemed a less attractive ally, and neither lethal bombing nor mining of its harbors has ended North Vietnam's ability to carry on and perhaps intensify the war.

To the Editor: If history is any guide, the recent bombings of North Vietnamese dikes must be considered as harbingers of large‐scale dike destruction in the future. Previous escalations of the war, dtiring both the Johnson and Nixon Administrations, were signaled by small‐scale attacks of the kind being planned. Like the current, dike bombings, those attacks were denied at the time “they occurred, were somehow excused, or were kept totally secret from the American people.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 11—Government officials were scratching their heads today over the exploits of William L. Taub, the mysterious New York lawyer” who represented James R. Hoffa in his abortive effort last week to go to Hanoi to negotiate for the release of American prisoners.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 11—South Vietnam's Communists today issued what they called an “important statement” of their terms for a peace settlement.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Sept. 12 — United States Air Force jets have bombed the major railroad and highway bridge in downtown Hanoi, the American military command said yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 11 (AP)—United States troop strength in South Vietnam decreased by 300 men last week, and 100 United States sailors were also withdrawn, leaving 36,700 American servicemen in the country, the United States command reported today.
PARIS, Sept. 11— Le Duc Tho, chief adviser to Hanoi's delegation at the Paris peace talks, returned to Paris today, creating speculation that he might meet again with Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on national security.
To the Editor: Citizens of this nation rightfully view with outrage the Palestinian guerrilla actions at the Olympic Games in taking hostage and killing Israeli athletes. Certainly such actions can do nothing for the guerrilla cause except to coalesce world opinion against it.
To the Editor: All Americans are shocked, and rightly so, at the killing of the Israelis at the Olympic Games, and yet most of us seem to be unmoved by the daily slaughter, maiming and burning of Vietnamese by our bombers. The Arabs have a grievance (though it does not excuse terrorism); they have been dispossessed and their lands occupied; but what harm have the Vietnamese done to us that we should destroy them and their land?
Mayor Lindsay yesterday ordered a review of a special job program for Vietnam veterans and the poor, following charges by City Councilman Robert I. Postel that the program has been misused to create patronage havens for favored appointees.
ALAMEDA, Calif., Sept. 12 (UPI) — The Enterprise, the world's largest warship, sailed for Vietnam today despite fleet of a half dozen small boats blockading the Golden gate in a war protest.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 12—This country's two principal intelligence agencies have concluded in recent reports submitted to the White House that Hanoi can sustain the fighting in South Vietnam “at the present rate” for the next two years despite the heavy American bombing of North Vietnam.
The United States Court of Appeals here granted a stay yesterday of a week‐old injunction against political activities by the National Committee for Impeachment, which seeks to impeach President Nixon for his conduct of the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 12—Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle has told the Senate Armed Services Committee that he received permission from Gen. Creighton W. Abrams and Adm. Thomas H. Moorer before ordering series of attacks on North Vietnamese airfields In November, 1971, well‐placed sources said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Sept. 13 —South Vietnamese marines fought their way into the walled. Citadel in Quangtri city Monday night, a South Vietnamese military spokesman said. The marines reportedly took up where paratroopers left off July 28, after the first attempt to recapture the. town from the North Vietnamese.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 12—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon'a adviser on national security, has expanded his overseas tour to Include talks with Government leaders in London and Paris.

WASHINGTON, Sept. 12 —William L. Taub, the mysterious figure who acted as “legal counsel” for James F. Hoffa, was able to arrange and attend the showing of a film on China at the White House last February, even though the Secret Service had a thick dossier on him.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 13 —Gen. Creighton W. Abrams was reported to have given the Senate Armed Services Committee testimony today that conflicted with the version of Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle on the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam.
Relatives of American war prisoners to be freed by North Vietnam, accompanied by three peace activists, left for Hanoi last night to escort the liberated pilots back home.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 13 (AP) — Seven antiwar protesters, observing the 39th day of a water‐only fast, demonstrated today at a busy Nixon reelection headquarters and left empty rice bowls as a memento.
PARIS, Sept. 13 (AP) — William L. Taub, who acted as “legal counsel” to James R. Hoffa during the former union leader's attempt to travel to North Vietnam, declined today to answer direct questions about his background.
The League of Women Voters is doing to try to reach the conscience of the electorate through its collective funnybone.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 13—The Justice Department announced today that it would not press criminal charges under Federal election laws against The New York Times for publishing a two‐page advertisment by a group advocating the impeachment of President Nixon.
In Tel Aviv, Meyer Lansky, the reputed American underworld figure, sounded philosophical as he discussed Israel's decision that he must leave the country. The 71‐year‐old Lansky was denied permission to stay, in Israel because his presence could prove “a danger to public safety.” In an interview published in The Jerusalem Post, Lansky said he did not'know where he would go now. “That's life,” he said. “At my age it's too late to worry. What will be will be.” Lansky, who has been living in Israel for 26 months and sought citzenship there, also reportedly said, “A Jew has slim chance in the world.”
MANCHESTER, N. H., Sept. 13 (AP)—The American party's Presidential candidate, John G. Schmitz, said here yesterday that, if elected, he would order Green Berets and a Marine division into North Vietnam to rescue American prisoners of war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 8—Shortcomings in the medical care provided by the South Vietnamese Government to its people are becoming more apparent as American medical support is phased out along with American combat troops.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 13 —Gen. Creighton W. Abrams was reported to have given the Senate Armed Services Committee testimony today that conflicted with the version of Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle on the unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Sept. 14 (AP)—As the battle for the Citadel of Quangtri continued, the Saigon command reported yesterday that heavy enemy artillery fire and stiff ground resistance prevented reinforcements from reaching the fortress.
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 14—Informed Korean sources report that President Park Chung Hee has agreed to a requent by President Nixon to delay the withdrawal of South Korean troops from South Vietnam.
To the Editor:
To the Editor:; Why do those people who warn of the danger of a “blood bath” by the Vietnamese Communists at the end of the war approve the colossal blood bath created by our past and present bombing of civilians?
In 1972 veterans have become a political issue. None too soon. Official statistics indicate the veteran unemployment is twice the national average, and three times as high among racial minorities. According to a poll conducted for the Veterans Administration, 5 per cent overlooked by the official count have given up even looking for work. Estimates drawn from the same poll put the number of veterans with a drug problem at 700,000.. Only one‐quarter of those eligible have resumed schooling under the present G.I. Bill, although 50 per cent did so after the last two wars. Throughout the country mental health professionals are disputing the official claim of a record low psychiatric casualty rate in Vietnam by citing innumerable cases of veterans suffering from a “post‐Vietnam syndrome.”
DANANG, South Vietnam, Sept. 11—"We are confused and afraid,” a disabled veteran said as he told of an attack on two refugee camps here over the weekend in which his son was among 28 persons killed. More than 90 other people were wounded.
To the Editor:
Retired Lieut. Col. Anthony Herbert, who left the Army when he was relieved of his Vietnam command after attempting to report alleged war crimes, told a conference in Washington how he felt the Army would react to criticism by military men of certain members of Congress. The conference, held in a Senate hearing room, was to examine the role of the military in American society and was sponsored by former Senator Albert Gore of Tennessee.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 14 —After more, than a month of debate, the Senate approved today the United States‐Soviet agreement to freeze a major part of their offensive nuclear arsenals for five years. However, it stipulated that there should be equality in the number of weapons in any future treaty governing strategic intercontinental arms.

WASHINGTON—Concerned Vietnam Veterans for Nixon is an organization that exists to give a voice to the prevailing but often unnoticed views of the vast majority of Vietnam veterans. We oppose Senator. McGovern's election because, while he accurately pinpoints some of this nation's problems, his solutions are totally counterproductive. With regard to the many problems of returning Vietnam veterans, Senator McGovern has often expressed concern for us but fails to recognize that his false characterization of the typical veteran as both drug addict and a psychopath is perhaps our biggest hurdle in the transition to meaningful and productive civilian lives.
eight buildings and cut lines in attacks on the Kep railroad yard 40 miles northeast of Hanoi, military spokesmen said.
The measure of George McGovern's failure so far as a candidate for Presi dent is a poll just taken by Louis Harris. It shows what should be an enormous reservoir of sympathy for the McGovern position on Vietnam: By a majority of 76 per cent to 21, Americans want to bring home “all U.S. military, naval and air forces from Vietnam.” But the poll finds:
QUANTRI, Sept. 15 (Reu ters)—Clouds of mud were flung into the air this morn ing as enemy artillery shells landed in the eastern part of the Citadel.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 15 — The White House and the State Department denied today pub lished reports that South Korea had agreed to delay the with drawal of its troops from South Vietnam in exchange for a commitment that American forces would stay in Korea until the middle of 1973.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 15 (AP) — A Protestant minister said today that Ameri can or South Vietnamese planes wrecked a church last month in the fighting for the Queson Valley south of Danang, but a spokesman for the United States Seventh Air Force said later that no American planes had been involved in the in cident.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 15—South Vietnam's op position press was virtually silenced today with the perma nent closing of 14 daily news papers and 15 other periodicals that failed to pay large bonds demanded by the Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Sept. 16—South Viet namese marines recaptured the Citadel in the heart of Quangtri City yesterday, American and South Vietnamese officers re ported. It was the most sig nificant victory for the Saigon Government since the North Vietnamese launched their of fensive March 30.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 15 (AP) — A Protestant minister said today that Ameri can or South Vietnamese planes wrecked a church last month in the fighting for the Queson Valley south of Danang, but a spokesman for the United States Seventh Air Force said later that no American planes had been involved in the in cident.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 15 (Agence France‐Presse)—Mrs. Cora Weiss and David Dellinger, the American anti war activists, arrived here by plane today on their way to Hanoi to escort home three American prisoners of war who are to be released by North Vietnamese authorities.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 15— Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle told the Senate Armed Services Committee during testimony this week that one month after staging his first unauthorized bombing raids on North Viet nam, he was criticized by high er‐ranking officers—not for a violation of rules, but because his planes missed their targets.
Since so much of the case for re‐electing President Nixon is being built on the supposed efficiency of his Administration, it is instructive to examine the dents put in that business‐like image by the strange shenani gans surrounding James R. Hoffa's effort to become a diplomatic courier to Hanoi.
MORRISTOWN, Sept. 15— Mrs. Richard M. Nixon toured Morris Township today in sup port of her husband's campaign for re‐election.
QUANGTRI, South Viet nam, Sept. 15 (AP) — Five South Vietnamese marines crouched behind a shell battered brick wall, hurling grenades at snipers on the other side.
PARIS, Sept. 15—Henry A. Kissinger met with North Viet nam's senior negotiators here today in their 17th secret ses sion aimed at ending the war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 15—South Vietnam's op position press was virtually silenced today with the perma nent closing of 14 daily news papers and 15 other periodicals that failed to pay large bonds demanded by the Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
QUANGTRI, South Viet nam, Sept. 15 (AP)—Five South Vietnamese marines crouched behind a shell battered brick wall, hurling grenades at snipers on the other side.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Sept. 16—South Viet namese marines recaptured the Citadel in the heart of Quangtri City yesterday, American and South Vietnamese officers re ported. It was the most sig nificant victory for the Saigon Government since the North Vietnamese launched their of fensive March 30.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 16 (Agence France‐Presse)— Four foreign languages—Eng lish, Russian, Chinese and French — will be taught in North Vietnamese schools, ac cording to a decision by Pre mier Pham Van Dong reported here.
WASHINGTON— Every morning, seven days a week, the White House receives over the signature of Defense Secretary Melvin R. Laird a detailed report on the bombing of North Viet nam in the preceding 24 hours.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 16 (AP)—Secretary of the Army Robert F. Froehlke has au thorized the Air Force and Army Clemency and Parole Review Board to consider a clemency petition filed on be half of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., convicted of murder in the Mylai massacre case.
The secrecy that surrounds the Senate hearings into charges that high‐ranking officers were aware of Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle's unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam makes it impossible and improper at this point to judge the behavior of those who have appeared before the panel. It is clear, however, that, in the words of Senator Stennis, chairman of the Armed Services Com mittee, “a conflict” exists between the testimonies of General Lavelle and Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, prospec tive Army Chief of Staff.
MOSCOW—On the surface, the Kremlin appears to have gained more than the White House from Henry A. Kissinger's talks with the Communist party leader, Leonid Brezhnev, here last week, but only time—and the Vietnam negotiations—will show whether that impression is valid.
I can only wonder at the tact and taste you demonstrated in publishing two articles, one warning all Jews to stay clear of Germany, the other provid ing a scenic tour through a Baltic con centration camp on the front page of the Travel and Resorts (!) section. And this while Germany was hosting the American team, among others, during the Olympic Games. One could further marvel at Mr. Birnbaum, “the totally assimilated Jew,” whose first meeting with a middle‐aged German provoked apocalyptic visions of the past. How indignant the American media would be if the West Germans expressed distaste for hosting the perpetrators of genocidal actions in Vietnam, or if the Japanese should see fit to print exhaustive articles on Hiroshima and Nagasaki the next time Americans participate in the Olympiad in Japan. One senses that the author was relieved he found nothing likable in West Germany, although, as he was a supposed businessman, this is hard to believe.
As a Jewish Vietnam veteran, I read “The End of Assimilation” with an acute sense of anguish. The article so vividly reproduced in my mind one of my war experiences that, just as Birnbaum con cluded, “I … sat back and cried.” I offer you this experience in the hope that Jews across this country who agonized with the author will agonize with me and do something.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Sept. 17 — Communist forces have begun an offensive in southern Quangngai Prov ince, south or Danang, with seven simultaneous attacks, American officials in Danang said yesterday.
WASHINGTON—The case of Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle and his private air war reached the Senate Armed Services Committee last week, with one immediate casualty—the concept that the highest‐ranking military or civilian authorities have ultimate com mand and control over the air war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 16 — Henry A. Kissinger said today that the continuation of his se cret peace negotiations with North Vietnamese representa tives indicated that there was a “certain seriousness” in them.
A detailed account of how 12 volunteers from the 1st Mar ine Division helped the South Vietnamese liberate the village of Binh Nghia from the Viet cong during 17 months of 1966– 67. The author, formerly a Marine captain, went along on night patrols during the action and recorded actual dialogue. He also did extensive in terviewing with villagers and surviving American partici pants. As he himself says, this “is not a political book or a critique of national policy”; it is rather a story of dedicated, courageous men — American and Vietnamese — undergoing the rigors of guerrilla warfare.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 16 (AP)—Four American anti war leaders and the relatives of two American prisoners of war arrived here today to es cort home three United States pilots scheduled to be freed by the North Vietnamese.
ACTORS for whom the sun rises and sets on a film studio grow like bananas in large bunches and are just as in distinguishable. But an actor who earns a Ph.D. in com munications, writes a book about blacklisting, lectures against the war in Vietnam, and debates with William Buckley on TV is a different kind altogether and may well be one of a kind.
Stanley Hoffmann's sympa thetic review of Frances Fitz Gerald's “extraordinary book” (“Fire in the Lake,” Aug. 27) ends with a misleading inter pretation of her title. He says we must “not simply… get out” but “create the conditions for the independent, national Government of South Vietnam that could begin the cleansing of the lake.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 16 (AP)—The immediate Hanoi area was placed off lim its to United States fighter‐ bombers today for the arrival of a group of Americans invited by North Vietnam to pick up three captured pilots, United States military sources dis closed.
Those unaware of the imprecision of warfare even in present times, with modern facilities, and therefore in clined to be unduly critical of the oper ations of the United States in Vietnam, might do well to recall the way in which the United Nations forces con ducted their operations in the Congo in 1960–61. Paul‐Henri Spaak, the Bel gian statesman, was very critical of these operations.
How purely military judgment can miscarry even from a strategic standpoint is all too sharply illustrated by the bombing of North Vietnam that was authorized.
NEW HAVEN—The degradation of Public discourse is the heaviest blow Korea and Vietnam have inflicted upon the American spirit. Our leaders seem almost derailed by the stress of events and the lure of “peace.” As a result, foreign policy is discussed in an Or wellian language, according to the Red Queen's rule that words mean what she says they mean.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 17 — After a week of hearings into unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam, the Senate Armed Services Committee is far from resolving what some Senators consider the most pressing question raised thus far — did any of Lieut. Gen. John D. La velle's superiors know what he was doing? The hearings will con tinue tomorrow with testimony from Gen. John D. Ryan, the Air Force Chief of Staff, who in March dismissed General Lavelle as commander of the Seventh Air Force.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 17 (AP)—Terrorists riding on motorbikes hurled hand gre nades at two coffee shops and an intersection in separate sec tions of Danang tonight, killing four persons and wounding 14, reports from the area said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Sept. 18 (AP)—United States jets set fire to fuel, am munition and storage facilities in raids near Hanoi, but stayed away from the North Vietnam ese capital itself, the United States command announced yesterday.
Little remains of the myth, carefully nurtured by the policy‐makers of three successive Administrations, that the United States is engaged in protecting a burgeoning democracy in South Vietnam. With every passing day the evidence mounts that the thin veneer of popular government was nothing more than a facade presented to the naive Americans in return for unlimited and unquestioning support.
To the Editor:
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 17 — An American mother ciasped her son, and an Ameri can wife embraced her husband here tonight in a room hot with television lights, at the release ceremony for three American prisoners of war, pilots shot down over North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 17 (UPI)—The Presidential candi date of the American Party said today that President Nixon wanted to surrender South Vietnam to the Communists on the installment plan while his Democratic opponent, Senator George McGovern, wanted to surrender immediately.
HUNTINGTON, W. Va., Sept. 17—Senator George McGovern began the second straight two‐ week swing of his Presidential campaign here today by calling for the suspension of a Cabi net member and declaring the “failure of Richard Nixon's war on drugs.”
Six youthful Vietnam war protesters who said they had fasted on water for 40 days gathered with about 100 friends last night to mark their absti nence and discuss future anti war action.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 18—Gen. John D. Ryan, the Air Force chief of staff, defended today his decision to punish only Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle for unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam and told Senate investigators that he “couldn't guarantee” that such incidents “wouldn't hap pen again.”
WASHINGTON—The North Viet namese launched their massive inva sion of South Vietnam last Easter weekend. What have been the results of that invasion? In a word, failure.
But America's European allies fear a McGovern admin istration even more than they dislike the Nixon one. The Democratic candidate has said that he is a “con vinced internationalist.” Withdrawal from Vietnam and his “Come Home America” call, Mr. McGovern has said, are intended not as moves toward disengagement every where but as steps that would enable the United States to concentrate on really vital interests abroad, Western Europe and the Mediterranean first of all. This assurance, however, remains vague. What is concrete, in European minds, is the McGovern proposal to withdraw 170,000 of America's 300,000 troops from NATO's front lines.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 18—Senator John Stennis of Mississippi is not likely, to be elected man of the year by the N.A.A.C.P., but he may be the ideal person to investigate the strange case of Gen. John P. Lavelle and the unauthorized bombing of North Viet nam. Not only is the Senator a man of unquestioned personal integrity and one of those Southern patriarchs who command exceptional respect in the Senate; he also has been active and effective for so long as a member of the Armed Services Committee that he knows as well as any man can where the bodies are buried in the Pentagon and the boondoggles are buried in the defense budget.
Tom Wicker, states in his Sept. 12 column, “The Issue of 1972,” that “the American people do not seem to re alize that their air power is carrying out one of the most terrible mass ex terminations in history....”
Gerald E. McGuirk's letter (Sept. 9) reads as though it had been written by the Nixon Administration. The his torical backdrop to the Vietnam con flict is quite distorted and inaccurate and appears to be the usual line of fered from Washington.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 18 (AP)—United States troop strength in Vietnam dropped officially by 200 last week, to 36,500, the United States command reported to day.
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Sept. 18 (AP)—Six Vietnam Veterans Against the War today sought the removal of United States District Court Judge David Mid diebrooks from hearing their conspiracy case and asked to be allowed to examine grand jury testimony against them. They are charged with plan ning to disrupt the Republican National Convention at Miami Beach last month.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 18 — The Air Force is dropping sim ulated North Vietnamese cur rency printed on propaganda leaflets over North Vietnam to drive home to the population woes caused by “inflation,” State Department officials said today.
YOKOHAMA, Japan, Tuesday, Sept. 19 (AP)—At least 44 peo ple, most of them policemen, were injured early today in clashes between riot policemen and about 6,000 student demon strators in front of a United States Army supply depot.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 18—Gen. John D. Ryan, the Air Force chief of staff, defended today his decision to punish only Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle for unauthorized bombing of North Vietnam and told Senate investigators that he “couldn't guarantee” that such incidents “wouldn't hap pen again.”
ATLANTA, Sept. 18 (AP)— Ronnie Thompson, Republican Mayor of Macon, Ga, says that if he is elected to Congress he will offer First Lieut. William C. Calley Jr. a job on his Wash ington staff Lieutenant Calley is under house arrest in Fort Banning, Ga., awaiting a deci sion on appeals on a court martial conviction of murder in the 1968 Mylai slayings.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Sept. 19 (AP)—South Vietnamese reinforcements re portedly pushed into an embat tled district capital in the Cen tral Highlands yesterday to re Have a militia force that had been under siege for three days.
Just as important and useful drugs are found on occasion to give rise to untouched reactions, so there are alarming rumors of unexpected, long range and even lethal consequences to some of the specific new chemicals of war. The tale of a fivefold increase in the incidence of a liver cancer in man is a case in point.
As the Presidential campaign evolves, it is becoming clear that the two candidates are talking past each other on the subject that President Nixon asserts is the central issue: the foreign policy needed to assure a generation of peace.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Sept. 19—The General Assem bly convened today for its 27th annual session amid tight anti‐terrorism measures and heard its new President, Stan islaw Trepczynski of Poland, declare that the war in Viet nam should be stopped “once and for all.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 19 (AP) —Adm. Thomas C. Moorer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today that the Lavelle affair had been over played, but had not hurt the military.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 19 (Agence France‐Presse)— Three American prisoners who were released at a ceremony Sunday left the capital at dawn today for a tour of heavily bombed areas of Namdinh and Ninhbinh 60 miles from Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 19 (UPI)—Trimming the 10 per cent tax on telephone calls by half was recommended today by Representative Stewart B. McKinney, Republican of Con necticut, to show that the Viet nam war is winding down.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 19 (Reuters)—Cambodian air craft caught and attacked about 300 North Vietnamese sampans in the waterlogged Mekong River Valley, 26 miles south west of here, the military com mand reported today.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Sept. 19—The General Assem bly convened today for its 27th annual session amid tight anti‐terrorism measures and heard its new President, Stan islaw Trepczynski of Poland, declare that the war in Viet nam should be stopped “once and for all.”
TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Sept. 19 (AP) — United States District Judge David L. Middlebrooks ordered an indefinite postpone ment today in the conspiracy trial of six antiwar veterans charged with plotting to dis rupt the Republican National Convention.
DENVER, Sept. 19— Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle's former top aide told a Senate commit tee today that the general per sonally ordered him to stage unauthorized bombing missions into North Vietnam and also demanded that official post strike reports be falsified.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 19—“The other side is building a nation in the hills,” a high American officer said, ruefully summing up developments in the last six months in the five northern provinces of South Vietnam, known as Military Re gion I.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Sept. 20 — Heavy fighting was reported yesterday in the central coastal province of Quangngai, with four of its 10 district capitals under con tinuing attack.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 19— The Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved a revised $1.5‐billion military authoriza tion bill today to replace the one that the Senate killed in July.
DENVER, Sept. 19— Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle's former top aide told a Senate commit tee today that the general per sonally ordered him to stage unauthorized bombing missions into North Vietnam and also demanded that official post strike reports be falsified.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 19—The United States Air Force announced today that Capt. Charles D. DeBelle vue of Lafayette, La., has been credited with shooting down six North Vietnamese MIG's, making him the leading ace of the war.
To the Editor: Robert Gottlieb's Sept. 12 letter is a gross misstatement of fact. Mr. Gott lieb faults Senator McGovern for say ing the North Vietnamese could be depended upon to release our prison ers as they did the French. He makes the statement that the North Viet namese released only 11,000 of the 37,000 French P.O.W.'s.
To the Editor: One point upon which we might all agree is that the conflict in Vietnam could not have continued without the active support of North Vietnam by both Russia and China. In this area we have been on a collision course with both countries yet, curiouser and curiouser, we have a companion paral lel course of accommodation on world trade between and among these very nations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Sept. 21 (AP)—North Vietnamese forces reportedly tightened their hold yesterday on Quangngai Province, south of Danang.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 20—We are at another of those increasingly common place passes in current history when events have outstripped burlesque. Morning after morning, Page One reads like a lunatic's romp put together by the Marx brothers' script writers.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 20 — American planes have been mining the coastal rivers and canals of northern Quangtri Province, just below the demilitarized zone, to pre vent the North Vietnamese from moving supplies across the border by boat, a senior United States Air Force officer has disclosed.
“Stepin Fetchit was a point of pride to the Negro people,” said Lincoln Theo dore Perry, who became Hollywood's first black star by playing the role of the shuffling Stepin Fetchit in movies of the 1920's and 1930's. Mr. Perry, once the owner of 12 cars (including a pink Cadillac), and the employer of 16 Chinese serv ants, lost his riches in the early 1940's. In 1970 he filed a $3‐million suit against the Columbia Broadcasting Sys tem, the Xerox Corporation, 20th Century‐Fox and the Indiana Broadcasting Com pany, in connection with a 19,68 documentary film that characterized him, he said, as “the white man's Negro, the traditional lazy, stupid crap‐shooter, chicken‐stealing idiot.” Now that his suit has been blocked in Federal Court in Indianapolis, Mr. Perry who is 80 years old, has ap pealed at a news conference for public support. “I opened the door to the black men of America,” he said. “If I let this [suit] go, the same thing can happen to Sammy Davis Jr., Bill Cosby and Sidney Poitier.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 20 (AP) — Evidence mounted to day that a Soviet airliner ex pected to carry three released American prisoners of war out of North Vietnam Saturday might bypass Vietiane and make its first landing in Bur ma or India.
COLUMBUS, Ohio, Sept. 20 — Senator George McGovern engaged today in a sharp de bate about his policies on amnesty and the Vietnam war with two workers at the Western Electric Company plant here.
HUE, South Vietnam, Sept. 20 (Reuters) — President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that South Vietnamese forces driv ing Communist troops back to‐ ward North Vietnam would call a temporary halt 10 miles from the demilitarized zone.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 20— Representative Otis G. Pike said today that he had reason to believe that reconnaissance photographs of most of Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle's unau thorized bombing missions over North Vietnam had been avail able to the military chain of command.
NORTH BERGEN, N. J. Sept. 20— Senator George McGov ern proposed today a $6.1‐bil lion Federal program to aid the elderly.
CAMP LEJEUNE, N. C., Sept. 20—A jury of six officers of the United States Marines im posed the maximum sentence today on Pvt. Thomas P. Mi chaud, a Vietnam veteran who pleaded guilty yesterday to un authorized absence of nearly three years.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Sept. 20—Dien Tin, one of 14 daily newspapers closed last week as a result of a presi denial decree requiring pub lishers to post large bonds, has belatedly deposited its bond and resumed publication.
SANTA BARBARA, Calif.—Those of us who were brought up between the two World Wars were taught to be isolationists. In our grade‐school his tory classes tremendous significance was given to the Monroe Doctrine. As sixth‐graders we learned that Euro peans were forever squabbling among themselves and their wars did not concern Americans.
FORT ORD, Calif., Sept. 21 —The court‐martial of Pvt. Billy Dean Smith, the young black draftee accused of killing two white Army officers in Vietnam, went into an un expected recess here today.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 21—A panel of advisers to Senator George McGovern called today for a new “philosophical frame work” for national security policy and accused President Nixon of overextending Ameri ica abroad and shortchanging its citizens at home.
PARIS, Sept. 21 — The 160th formal session of the Vietnam peace conference was held here today, with no visible sign that intensive American diplomatic activity last week had changed the position of any delegation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Sept. 22—for the first time since March, 1965, a week has passed without American combat deaths in Indochina, the United States command reported yesterday.
Senator George McGovern told the leaders of 25 major national Jewish organizations yesterday that he would vote in favor of a plan to withhold “most favored nation” trading status from the Soviet Union until it abolished its “slave tax” on Soviet Jewish emigrants and ceased its “arming of Arab ter rorists.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 21 — President Nguyen Van Thieu has rejected the latest Communist proposal for a three‐part coalition Govern ment in South Vietnam, saying: “Any political settlement in South Vietnam should be de termined by the South Viet namese people themselves with out foreign interference.”
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 21 (Agence France Presse)—The bar of one of Hanoi's main hotels was the setting today for an unusual sight here: An American pilot casually drinking a beer.
CHATTANOOGA, Sept. 21 (AP) — Vice President Agnew accused Senator George Mc Govern tonight of “parroting the propaganda of the North Vietnamese” and in helping to destroy “the morale of thou sands of Americans who are not in possession of the facts” about Communist brutality in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 22—An issue of a Saigon daily newspaper was confiscat ed by the Government, its edi tors charge, for having pub lished a report “extolling the air support the United States gave in the battles of Quang tri province.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 22—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam, like President Nguyen Van Thieu two days ago, said today that he rejected the latest Com munist peace proposal, for a tri partite coalition, as “a plot of the Communists to take over South Vietnam.”
HONG KONG, Sept 22—Three Saturday, Sept. 23 (AP) — Fighting spread closer to the capital of Quangngai Province on the north central coast yes terday as enemy attacks were reported on Government cut posts around the city.
When a minor official of the Truman Administration was found to have taken a deep freeze from a favor seeker, or his wife a fur coat, the country rang with cries of scandal and corruption.
A year‐long study of the city's handling of the Federally financed emergency employ ment program has found the Lindsay administration making little effort to reach the chronically unemployed and Vietnam veterans, while favor ing teachers and other profes sionals with jobs.
HONG KONG, Sept. 22—Three American servicemen who have been released from detention but so far kept in North Viet nam will be permitted to leave for home on the basis of an understanding that they will do nothing further to promote the American war effort in Indo china.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Sept. 24 (AP)—Thousands of South Vietnamese troops were engaged in sweeps on the northern front yesterday in an effort to prevent North Viet namese forces from recapturing hard‐won territory, the Saigon command reported.
CLEVELAND, Sept. 23—Sen ator George McGovern came here today to tell the Ohio Democratic Convention that “our principles are right for America, and Republican poli cies are wrong,” and to assert that the outcome of the 1972 Presidential campaign could be determined by Ohioans on Nov. 7.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 23—A Saigon police offi cial has been sentenced to two years in prison for illegal ar rests, the government news agency reported today.
SAIGON: In the unending Communist war of revolution in Vietnam the tendency among American generals and civilian officials has been to see each phase as signaling, finally, an end to the fighting. To them, the light at the end of the tunnel has never been far away, and the straight line of progress has always canted upward. So it was not, perhaps, surprising that when the North Vietnamese began their offensive in late March, 1972, senior Administration officials described it as a “last roll of the dice.” Nor is it surprising that they are now describing it as a “failure” because it did not succeed in toppling the régime of President Nguyen Van Thieu on the battlefield. Some of them have even predicted that the Com munists will therefore soften their terms for a peace, settlement, which they expect, happily, to come most likely about the time of the Presidential elections in November.
LONDON, Ky., Sept. 23 (AP)—Campaigning in one of the nation's most strongly Republican areas, Vice Presi dent Agnew defended the United States bombing of North Vietnam today and re jected the contention of Sen ator George McGovern, the Democratic‐Presidential can didate, that the Vietnam war is immoral and unpopular.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 23 (AP)—A leading North Viet namese editor has said that his country is preparing for four more years of war if President Nixon, as he expects, is re elected.
SAIGON, Sept. 23—One of Saigon's two remaining opposi tion newspapers has been heavily fined and one of its executives sentenced to a year's imprisonment for having pub lished a report on a Cornell University study on American bombing in Indochina.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Sept. 23 —The North Vietnamese Gov ernment, unaccountably, did not allow the three American prisoners of war that it re leased last week to leave Hanoi today as had been expected.
A former President of the United States, then General George Washing ton in winter quarters with his army at Newburgh, read the riot act to his officers when he learned that some of them were in a cabal conspiring to overthrow the Congress and impose a military dictatorship upon this infant republic.
In your editorial “Civilian Control” (Sept 17) you say in the third ?? graph: “General Abrams' quality as an officer has not been in doubt.” You are wrong. It is General Abrams' quality as an officer which is in seri ous question precisely in the context of your editorial.
How is one to explain the continu ing, enthusiastic use of massive air power in the destruction of Vietnam? Are the record‐shattering air raids which are dropping tonnages greater than those dropped on all of Germany and Japan in World War II to be ac counted for by simply attributing them to the zealous carrying out of the President's order to protect our re treating soldiers and the evacuation of our troops? Or is there a more encom passing explanation?
ERIE, Pa.—Stanley Franzcyk, an ethnic organizer for the Mc Govern ‐ Shriver ticket, spoke passionately recently to a group of Polish‐Americans here of their “time for a day in the sun.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 23—A group of 21 of South Vietnam's 57 Senators approved a resolution today de claring that President Nguyen Van Thieu had no legal author ity to govern by decree. The vote was taken in confusion after somebody threw a smoke grenade into the chamber.
CONCORD, N. H., Sept. 23 (AP) — Clark MacGregor, cam paign director for the Commit tee for the Re‐Election of the President, barnstormed through New Hampshire today, predict ing a large state victory for the President and attacking Democrats over Vietnam and the Watergate affair.
HONG KONG, Sept. 24 (Agence France‐Presse) — Ha noi's official press agency re ported tonight that American aircraft dropped hundreds of bombs of various kinds on sev eral parts of North Vietnam's port city of Haiphong yester day.
We all know that in relation to Vietnam Richard Nixon is a war monger, a butcher and a monster more vile than Hitler, and that George McGovern is a defeatist, a quitter and a modern Benedict Arnold. But sup pose a visitor from Uganda, impressed by the ferocity of the dove vs. hawk rhetoric, asked us to explain just ex actly how the President's Vietnam policy differs from the rival candi date's.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 24— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that court martial charges against Lieut. Gen. John D. Lavelle were pend ing and “under current review” by the Air Force in connection with unauthorized strikes he had ordered in North Vietnam.
By the end of this week President Nixon will have presided over the Vietnam war for longer than it took the United States to fight and win World War II. From Pearl Harbor to Japan's surrender it was three years, eight months and one week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 24 — President Nguyen Van Thieu has come out of the 1972 Communist offensive more powerfully in control of the machinery of Government here than ever before. But he seems to be less than sure of his own political strength and popular ity among the people of his country.
Senator George McGovern charged yesterday that Nixon administration “politics” might be delaying the release of three American pilots from North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 24 — President Nguyen Van Thieu has come out of the 1972 Communist offensive more powerfully in control of the machinery of Government here than ever before. But he seems to be less than sure of his own political strength and popular ity among the people of his country.
TORONTO—Each major failure in the conduct of postwar American for eign policy has led to the search for a new, more successful strategy which, in turn, has produced additional frus trations in a world ever less suscep tible to U.S. control. The Korean war and the irrelevance of “containment” evolved into Dulles' “new look” de pendence on strategic weapons, which the Kennedy Administration then modified to include a “limited war” doctrine whose main outcome was the Vietnam debacle. Today the Nixon Ad ministration has proclaimed the end of a bipolar diplomacy which it alleges is a new departure—one promising future peace and stability—in its larger foreign policy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Sept. 25 (AP)—Enemy forces backed by tanks and heavy artillery were reported to have renewed their assaults yesterday along the northern coast below Danang and cre ated more hazards along the vital Route 1.
WHITING, Vt.—Ken May berger and his wife, Sal, could sell everything they weave and sculpt to New York's smartest shops, but they don't. They say they would rather keep their in come low enough to escape Federal taxation.
Stanley M. Barkin's letter (Sept. 19) regarding the Geneva Accords and Vietnam repeats an error which needs correction, particularly since it has been uncritically accepted and pub lished in many articles and works dealing with the origin of American involvement in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 25 (AP)—Air Force Chief of Staff John D. Ryan, in testimony before a Senate commitee, singled out Lieut. Gen. Jahn D. Lavelle as the sole instigator of unauthorized air attacks against North Vietnam.
HONG KONG, Sept. 25 (Agence France‐Presse) — The North Vietnamese Foreign Min istry said today that the Nam dan Dam near Vinh was de stroyed by American bombs yesterday.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 25 (Agence France‐Presse)— The three American pilots re leased by North Vietnam Sept. 17 left here for China today on the first leg of their journey back to the United States.
The Vietnam war, which was supposed to be Senator George McGovern's strong suit politi cally, is actually working to the advantage of President Nixon in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut where much of the antiwar movement has been centered, according to a voter survey released yesterday.
SEATTLE, Sept. 5 (AP) — Senator George McGovern said today that President Nixon was the one man who “holds the key” to the release of United States prisoners of war in North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 25 — President Nixon won a political endorsement of his candidacy and pragmatic support for his new Soviet trade policy today from the International Long shoreman's Association.
HANOI, Sept. 25 (AP)—Pre mier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam has reiterated the po sition that the North Vietnam ese want to release all cap tured American pilots and will do so when there is agreement on ending the war.
STOCKHOLM, Sept 25—The Swedish government was in volved in intense diplomatic discussion today in anticipation of what some diplomats said was a possible confrontation later this week at Stockholm's international airport between United States officials and the three former prisoners of war released by Hanoi.
The Vietnam war, which was supposed to be Senator George McGovern's strong suit politi cally, is actually working to the advantage of President Nixon in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, where much of the antiwar movement has been centered, according to a voter survey released yesterday.
FORT ORD, Calif., Sept. 25 (UPI)—The “fragging” court martial of Army Pvt. Billy D. Smith was recessed today for an additional week while the prosecution seeks missing wit nesses. The trial judge, Col. Rawls H. Frazier, continued the case until Oct. 3 at the request of the prosecution. The prose cutor, Capt. Craig J. Casey would not say how many wit nesses were missing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 25 (AP)—American troop strength in Vietnam dropped by 400, to 36,100 last week, the United States command an nounced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Sept. 26 (AP)—South Vietnamese troops reportedly began an attempt yesterday to clear Communist‐led forces from the coastal highway run ning through the north‐central province of Quangngai.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 — Henry A. Kissinger met pri vately in Paris today with North Vietnamese representa tives, and the White House an nounced that the talks would be extended tomorrow into a second day.
PEKING, Wednesday, Sept. 27 (Reuters)—Three American pilots released by North Viet nam left Peking early today on their way home to the United States after an overnight stay here.
NEW ORLEANS, Sept. 26 (AP) — A Federal appeals court has dismissed contempt charges against four antiwar veterans who were twice jailed in Tallahassee, Fla., for refus ing to testify before a grand jury investigating protest plans for the Democratic and Repub lican national conventions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Sept. 27 (AP) — American officials said yester day that over‐all ground fight ing in South Vietnam had ta pered off to its lowest level since the North Vietnamese be gan their offensive March 30.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 (AP)—An official said that the Pentagon regards the three for mer war prisoners as active duty military officers responsi ble for turning themselves over to United States authorities at the first opportunity.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 — The Pentagon today disputed testimony that Secretary Laird opposed letting Congress know why General Lavelle was re lieved as the ranking Air Force officer in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 — Henry A. Kissinger met pri vately in Paris today with North Vietnamese representa tives, and the White House an nounced that the talks would be extended tomorrow into a second day.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26—The Senate reversed ed itself today and rejected, by a vote of 45 to 42, an end‐the‐war proposal that it had adopted two months ago. The vote was widely regarded here as marking the collapse of the antiwar movement in the Sen ate for this session, leaving the Administration firmly in control of the war issue in Congress.
GALVESTON, Tex., Sept. 26 —Sargent Shriver, the Demo cratic Vice‐Presidential nomi nee, said today that any con sideration of amnesty for those who fled the country to avoid military service should await the conclusion of “a national program to take care of the veterans of the Vietnam war.”
CHICAGO, Sept. 26— Vice President Agnew offered a paean of praise for President Nixon and his foreign policies at a gathering of wealthy sup porters today.
MOSCOW, Sept. 26 (Reuters) —United States officials said tonight that American diplo mats would try to meet the three pilots freed by North Vietnam when they arrive here tomorrow.
The Air Force announced yesterday that it was tempo rarily sending 48 of its F‐111A attack bombers to Southeast Asia to bolster its low‐level and all‐weather capabilities for the approaching monsoon sea son.
STOCKHOLM, Sept. 26 — What amounted to a dispute among antiwar groups became evident here today over the publicly announced travel plans of the American peace delega tion escorting the three prison‐ ers from Hanoi.
In parochial‐school uniforms, European peasant garb, yar‐ mulkes and plain, everyday school clothes, children by the thousands turned out yester day to hear President Nixon dedicate the American Museum of Immigration in an addition to the pedestal of the Statue of Liberty.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 (Reuters)—The Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. John D. Ryan, has testified that Melvin R. Laird, the Secretary of Defense, turned down his recommendation that key members of Congress be told why Gen. John D. Lavelle was relieved in April.
SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 26 (AP)—Senator George McGov ern, the Democratic Presiden tial candidate, blamed what he described as interference by the Nixon Administration for the delay of a week in the de parture of the prisoners from Hanoi.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Sept. 26—Foreign Minister An drei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union said today that his Gov ernment opposed acts of ter rorism and “acts of violence that serve no positive ends and cause loss of human life.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26—A recent bulletin published by the Christophers contained this informal prayer:
The United States Government did not arrange for the release of the three prisoners of war now on their way home from Hanoi. Nor, so far as can be ascertained, was it any policy or action of Washington's or any words of the Nixon Administration that prompted the North Vietnamese Government to turn these men loose. Why then should the Pentagon and officials abroad be so determined to get control of these men before they even return to this country, and why should Pentagon officials including Secretary Laird be raising the threat ening possibility of court‐martialing them? 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Sept. 28—The United States command reported yes terday that its planes had at tacked targets in an arc around Hanoi during the previous 24 hours, with the closest mission 14 miles from the North Viet namese capital.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 27—Premier Tran Thien Khiem has charged his nation's gigantic Government bureauc racy with clock‐watching, moonlighting and failing to work hard.
ROCHESTER, Sept. 27 (AP)— A grand jury that investigated clashes between the police and antiwar demonstrators criti cized both factions and recom mended that complaints against policemen be handled by the district attorney instead of police administrators. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27— Henry A. Kissinger arrived here from Paris tonight amid ru mors, which were strongly de nied by the White House, that there had been a breakthrough in Vietnam peace negotiations.
HONOLULU — Viewing my tenure as commander in chief of Pacific forces, I am struck by the realization that there have been tremendous changes in this vast area within these four years. The United States has made great strides in attaining the goals of the Nixon Doctrine, which call for continued United States lead ership in the Pacific—but with re duced American forces. 
One of the most tragic aspects of the mail‐a‐bomb campaign against Is raeli diplomats, so far overlooked by most observers, is the fact that the bombs used in the campaign are American‐made gravel mines, and were first used by American forces in Indochina. The use of gravel mines in Indochina was first proposed by the Jason study group (a group of civilian scientists who regularly advise the military on new applications of tech nology) after a meeting at the Dana Hall School at Wellesley. They sug gested that gravel mines would be useful for both “harassment” and “area‐denial.” 
MOSCOW, Sept. 27 (UPI)— Antiwar activists accompany ing the three American pilots released by North Vietnam charged today that the Penta gon was attempting to convert other captured fliers into es pionage agents.
SAIGON, Thursday, Sept. 28 (AP)—For the second succes sive day, United States B‐52 bombing raids across South ?? were reported curtailed yesterday to fewer than half of the normal 100 strikes.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27— The Army has been actively investigating allegations that another infantry company com mitted War crimes one year earlier in the same area where the mass slayings at Mylai oc curred in 1968.
MOSCOW, Sept. 27—Three American pilots freed by North Vietnam arrived here today and turned down an official Ameri can offer of assistance in their journey to the United States.
In less than six weeks, we, the American people, will be choosing the President and Vice President of the United States for the next four years. But we will be doing more than that; we will be determining whether we want this country to continue along the course it has been taking during the past four years, or whether we want to restore to American political life its tradi tional values of democratic liberalism and social concern. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Sept. 28 (Agence France ‐Presse) — President Nguyen Van Thieu and the United States Ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, met for 45 minutes early this morning At the Doclap Palace.
News reports on the Vietnam peace talks in Paris shook the bond market out of the dol drums yesterday afternoon and pushed most long‐term interest rates down sharply. 
MOSCOW, Sept. 27—Three American pilots freed by North Vietnam arrived here today and turned down an official Ameri can offer of assistance in their journey to the United States. 
LOS ANGELES, Sept. 27— President Nixon carried to Cal ifornia today his quest for a “clear majority” in the Presi dential election, portraying his opponent as one whose domes tic policies would lead to “confiscation of wealth” and whose defense proposals would be a “move toward war.” 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27— Henry A. Kissinger arrived here from Paris tonight amid ru mors, which were strongly de nied by the White House, that there had been a breakthrough in Vietnam peace negotiations.
Nearly 200 labor leaders here from the building trades, the uniformed services, the long‐ shoremen and the teamsters joined yesterday in forming a committee to re‐elect President Nixon, praising his handling of labor's problems and his efforts to achieve “peace with honor” in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27— Defense Secretary Melvin R. Laird refused today to rule out the possibility of court‐martial proceedings against any of the three American prisoners of war just released by North Vietnamese authorities.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27 — The Senate Armed Services Committee, which has been in vestigating charges of unau thorized bombing of North Vietnam by the Air Force, has widened its inquiry to include allegations of illegal activities by the Navy. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 28— A former Navy, pilot told the Senate Armed Services Com mittee today that pilots aboard his aircarft carrier off Vietnam in late 1971 and early 1972 had been instructed to bomb tar gets in North Vietnam regard less of whether they were fired upon first.
The three American pilots freed by North Vietnam and their escort of antiwar leaders arrived from Copenhagen last night at Kennedy International Airport, and the three — after a 25‐minute shouting match aboard the parked Scandina vian Airlines System plane— were taken by Defense Depart ment officials to military hos pitals.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 28 — The Senate Appropriations Com mittee, in the political battle over a vetoed appropriations bill for health, education and wel fare, sought today to shift back to President Nixon the burden of deciding which social pro grams should be given budget. ary cuts.
I am writing as a Vietnam veteran in response to the Sept. 15 Op‐Ed article by John O'Neill. Mr. O'Neill writes of “Senator McGovern's plan to deprive the South Vietnamese people of their freedom.”
Is it possible, now that there no longer are American combat deaths in Vietnam to report, to concern our selves with human combat deaths in Vietnam caused by Americans?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 28 (UPI)—One Ameri can was killed in war action in Indochina last week, United States military spokes men said today.
Former Gov. Raymond P. Shafer of Pennsylvania was named winner of the New York City Council of Churches' 1972 Family of Man award. Mr. Shafer, chairman of the National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse, is being honored “especially for his leadership in the world's ef fort to better understand and combat drug abuse.” He will receive the award at a din ner here Nov. 2.
SAIGON, Sept. 28 — The Saigon Government charged to day that Communist troops killed “hundreds of inhabi tants” of the villages of Nangan and Ducquang in the embattled province of Quangngai last Fri day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Sept. 29 (AP)—American fighter‐bombers attacked North Vietnam's transportation system and military depots Wednesday with more than 300 raids for the third successive day, the United States command re ported yesterday.
With every passing day, it becomes more unmistak ably evident that the American prisoners of war have become the pawns of the rival propaganda machines— in Hanoi and in Washington. The act of releasing some captives, and particularly of giving credit for the trans action to the American anti‐war movement, is obviously a calculated political move by North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 28 — Hanoi charged today that an American “propaganda machine is trying to give the impres sion” that the United States and North Vietnam are “getting closer” in peace talks held in Paris.
PARIS, Sept. 28—The 161st session of the Vietnam peace talks was held here today, with no progress reported.
The Communist leaders in Hanoi keep on misjudging American public opinion. They seem to believe that if they release three U.S. prisoners to antiwar and anti‐Nixon propagandists, while holding on to the other pris oners, the American people will be impressed by their generosity and turn to George McGovern in the election as a way to end the war and bring all the American prisoners home.
Siding against a Conserva tive party candidate, Senator James L. Buckley yesterday en dorsed State Senator John J. Marchi, a Staten Island Repub lican for re‐election.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 28—South Vietnam re iterated today its rejection of a Communist proposal for a three‐ way coalition government here.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 28 — A former Navy pilot told the Senate Armed Services Com mittee today that pilots aboard his aircarft carrier off Vietnam in late 1971 and early 1972 had been instructed to bomb tar gets in North Vietnam regard less of whether they were fired upon first.
The three American pilots freed by North Vietnam and their escort of antiwar leaders arrived from Copenhagen last night at Kennedy International Airport, and the three — after a 25‐minute shouting match aboard the parked Scandina vian Airlines System plane— were taken by Defense Depart ment officials to military hos pitals.
Secretary of State William P. Rogers said last night that de spite recent setbacks “the forces favoring a peaceful set tlement” in the Middle East “still have the upper hand.”
PARIS, Sept. 29 (UPI)—Gen. Le Van Vien, a well‐known warlord in South Vietnam dur ing the French colonial era, died in exile in Paris Wednes day at the age of 70.
The three American pilots freed by North Vietnam began intensive medical checkups and debriefings yesterday while the mother of one of the men com plained that the military's reac tion to his return “really didn't seem like a hero's welcome.”
SAN DIEGO, Sept. 29—Lieu tenant (jg.) Norris A. Charles, back home from nearly nine months of imprisonment in North Vietnam, today occupied a suite normally reserved for captains and admirals at Balboa Naval Hospital here.
SAN DIEGO, Sept. 29 — North Vietnam's release of selected United States prisoners of war into the custody of American antiwar activists has complicated and possibly frus trated a Pentagon plan for the gradual and cautious return of the captives to their families.
PARIS, Sept. 29—North Viet nam's spokesman said today that negotiations here were at a complete deadlock and no progress had been made.
TAMPA, Fla., Sept. 29—A handful of protesters and a handful of partisans lifted Vice President Agnew to his oratori cal best today as the Republi can campaign dipped deep into the Old South, seeking the Wallace vote.
MONTGOMERY, Ala., Sept. 29—Maj. Edward Elias, 34, one of the three American prisoners released by North Vietnam, spent his first day back on an American military base under going “routine” medical exam inations and “intelligence de briefings.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 29 — President Nixon today sent one of his principal foreign policy advisers to Saigon to confer with President Nguyen Van Thieu and make “a general as sessment of the situation there.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 29—President Thieu said today that during the last four years he had lost hope of peace, and he reiterated his Government's implacable re jection of a Communist pro posal for a coalition govern ment.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Sept. 30 (AP)—The Unit ed States has sent the contro versial F‐111A fighter‐bomber back into the air war over North Vietnam for the first time in four and a half years.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 29— Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, chair man of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the Senate Armed Services Committee today that the Navy had not conducted unauthorized bombing strikes against North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 29— Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, chair man of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the Senate Armed Services Committee today that the Navy had not conducted unauthorized bombing strikes against North Vietnam.
BOSTON, Sept. 29—Outside of the small circle officially involved, none of us can really be informed on the state of the talks between Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho. But among some peo ple who have thought about Vietnam for years there is now a feeling— a tingling sensation, as one put it—that something just could happen in Paris.
WASHINGTON Sept. 29— The Pentagon's chief specialist on prisoner affairs denied to day that North Vietnam im posed travel conditions on the release last week of three American pilots.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 29—Expelled by the Sai gon Government, the Indian delegation to the International Control Commission left here today to establish headquarters in Hanoi.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 29— The White House has quietly passed the word to the rest of the Nixon Administration—in cluding Melvin It Laird, the Secretary of Defense—to take a low‐key approach to the three prisoners of war who returned to the United States last night.
