

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































THE fifth New York Film Festival was brought to a noisy wind-up on Saturday night with the showing of a fierce, unmitigated propaganda picture—"Far From Vietnam."It is a frantic and formless compilation of filmed material—newsreel footage, interviews, cinema verité reportage, put-downs of President Johnson with montage tricks—that carries the angry message that the war in Vietnam is a classic example of a war of the rich against the poor, and that it is being waged by the United States to "demonstrate to the world that revolution is a dead end."It says, in a succession of segments and assorted intercut sequences, that the military forces of this country are ruthlessly slaughtering helpless women and children in Vietnam, and that there is absolutely no moral reason or political justification for our being there. It includes a clearly sympathetic interview with Ho Chi Minh and another with Fidel Castro explaining why guerrilla warfare always wins.There is outright ridicule of Vice President Humphrey's tour of Europe last year and a thoroughly scurrilous garble of shots of General William C. Westmoreland speaking, as seen on a badly tuned color television set. There is also a lengthy and tedious dissertation by a French actor reviewing Herman Kahn's book, "On Escalation," and a rambling talk by Jean-Luc Godard giving his feelings about the Vietnam situation, as he sedulously squints through the finder of a movie camera.But the most explosive footage in this hodgepodge, and the most ironic, whether it was meant to be or not, is a long segment showing in vivid close-ups the chanting marchers and the hooting spectators along the route during the hectic peace rally and parade that were put on by anti-Vietnam demonstrators here last spring. It is explosive because it visions passion and fanaticism in such lurid and insistent graphic terms, and it is ironic because it indicates so clearly the total intemperance and blathering of radicals on both sides.This film was assembled in Paris by Chris Marker, the French director, from segments turned over to him by Alain Resnais, William Klein, Joris Ivens, Agnes Varda, Claude Lelouch and Mr. Godard. Its costs, which have not been made public, were guaranteed by a French producer who backed Mr. Resnais' "La Guerre Est Fini," according to Mr. Klein, who was in Philharmonic Hall on Saturday morning for a press screening of the film.



































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































THE key, perhaps exclusive, criterion of validity for the "new" cinema—Does it "involve" the audience? Does it grab the viewer's emotions and concerns with the forcefulness or excitement of its "statement," be it achieved through some narrative form or no?—was put to the test last night with the showing of two of Peter Whitehead's recent British films at the late presentation of the New York Film Festival in Philharmonic Hall.These films, coupled under the general and clearly come-on title, "The London Scene," which is just about as accurate as it would be to define the Broadway area as the New York "scene," might be called documentaries, if it weren't that they blandly defy or depart without any hesitation from the conventions of this familiar genre.The first one, haphazardly titled "Tonight Let's All Make Love in London," is a random and ricocheting hodgepodge of candidly photographed scenes of people talking or singing at protest meetings; straight-on, close-up interviews with prominent motion picture people such as Julie Christie, Lee Marvin and Michael Caine; sequences of recording sessions of popular rock 'n' roll bands, look-ins and talks with pop artists, and impressionistic shots of people dancing in the street.There is no form or continuity to it. It just bounces and tumbles ahead, scattering agitation and confusion, and, in the breezy, bumbling things that are said by the very mod people who are talked to, putting across the idea that "swinging London" is a mere manifestation of commercial encouragement of kookie cults that will pass.I gather this is precisely what Mr. Whitehead intended it to be—an engrossing and amusing observation of scattered aspects of the current mod scene, done so briskly the viewer gets caught up in it but not so seriously he's likely to be sold.The second film is considerably different. It is called "The Benefit of the Doubt," and it is a serious sort of running commentary on a current highly controversial play, called "US," which has been put on in London by the Royal Shakespeare Company under the direction of Peter Brook.Scenes of the play — a fierce and flaming satire on the war in Vietnam, done in a Brechtian fashion—are vividly intercut with intensely passionate talks with the actors, members of the production staff and especially Mr. Brook, out of which comes a stirring comprehension of the thought and emotion that went into the doing of this play.By this technique of back-and-forth cutting, Mr. Whitehead gets the viewer much involved not only with the evident statement of the stageplay (which is clearly one of outrage at what is going on), but also with the community of theatrical people who are profoundly and intelligently concerned.Not enough of the play is transmitted—just a few of its more expressive scenes—to permit a full judgment of it. It is not reproduced, that is, as was Mr. Brook's and this company's film rendering of the stage play, "Marat/Sade." But there is enough enacted to make one want to see more, and I hope we will.The scenes from the play are in color, incidentally—excellent color, as is that in the first film. The conversations with the actors and Mr. Brook are in black and white. This contrast gives subtle definition to the margin between stage illusion—stage statement — and the immediate cerebrating reality.This, I might add, was one of the livelier programs at the festival so far.





















































































































































































































































































































































"The Anderson Platoon," the documentary that opened at the 55th Street Playhouse yesterday, was shown last July 4 over the Columbia Broadcasting System's television network. It previously was presented on television in France. The hour-long movie, produced by Pierre Schoendorffer and filmed by Domínique Merlin, follows the activities of an American platoon under the command of Lieut. Joseph Anderson, in the central highlands of Vietnam in 1966.Jack Gould, reviewing the TV documentary for The New York Times, called it "a many-sided experience that was related with compelling human understanding." He said that it was "not only a lean and stark account of individuals in battle but a composite glimpse of the American character responding to the ultimate stress.""The Anderson Platoon," Mr. Gould continued, "reflected the outlook of a compassionate reporter who went to the front lines with his camera and often in astonishing close-ups caught the full, horrible drama of war for the men who do the fighting."

















CLAUDE LELOUCH loves the camera. He loves motion photography. He loves the myriad melanges of images he can splash and flow upon the screen. He also loves agitating combinations of offscreen sounds and melodies that form patterns of sensuous stimulation along with pictorial images.Indeed, I do suspect Mr. Lelouch, the young French director who made the elaborately pictorial and romantic "A Man and a Woman," which ran at the Paris for more than a year, prefers these things — photography and movement, sounds and musical effects—to the dramatic ideas or statements to be fashioned out of them.I certainly got that impression from "A Man and a Woman," which displayed a great deal of bold cinematic virtuosity to put across a diverting but trivial tale. And now I more strongly suspect it after seeing his latest French film, "Live for Life" ("Vivre Pour Vivre"), which came to the Fine Arts yesterday.In this casual cross-ruffing of the marital and extramarital affairs of a French television director who goes with his cameramen in search of pictures all over the world, Mr. Lelouch takes his camera to Africa, Amsterdam, New York, Vietnam and all over Paris, making pictures, pictures, pictures wherever he is.When his man leaves his wife in Paris and goes to Africa with a girl he has first spoken to, in passing, at a motel and has later picked up at a Paris restaurant, Mr. Lelouch gives us maybe 20 minutes of flashy footage of a big game hunt in Kenya and maybe as much of a TV interview with Belgian, French and German mercenaries in the Congo.With his man back home and then off with his wife for an anniversary revisit in Amsterdam, Mr. Lelouch follows the two around that city for a virtual travelogue, mixing a lot of two-timing scurrying hither and yon by the fellow when his girl arrives and puts up in the same hotel.Later he gives us lots of nice shots of the disappointed girl roaming sadly around New York, and a long sequence of the fellow shooting footage of grisly war and atrocity sights in Vietnam. And he concludes his film with some handsome but repetitious pictures of a Swiss ski resort, where the fellow is reunited with his wife.It all looks great in color, and Mr. Lelouch bedazzles the eye with startling close-ups, helicopter panoramas, wobbly camera shots and out-of-focus smears. He throws in strong sound effects and music, especially one reiterant melody that bears a marked resemblance to the popular "A Man and a Woman" theme.But the point of it all is elusive, and the characters are as random and dull — really dull, when you come right down to it—as were the characters in Mr. Lelouch's previous film. Yves Montand as the fellow is tedious with his endless deceptions and bland conceit, and Annie Giradot is tiresome and annoying as his smirking, complacent wife. Candice Bergen is beautiful but banal as the passing mistress who lets herself be walked upon. All they prove is that preoccupation with self is vexatious to others in this crowded world.It is notable and significant that Mr. Lelouch never lets us know the purpose or point of view of his TV director. He just makes pictures. So does Mr. Lelouch. And, like so many who fall in love with their own work, he doesn't know when to stop.



IF the searching young souls depicted in "The Hippie Revolt," ever expect to get through to the old folks at home, including this one, they had best stop peppering their testimonies with the nagging, hackneyed bit, "Ya know?" No, we don't know whatcha mean. So there. Ya know?This color, feature documentary, put together by some people on the West Coast who scoured various assemblies and lairs of the flower children, beardies, weirdies and truly dedicated whatsies, does have two distinct merits. As a darting camera tour of a swelling army of nonconformists, the film will smite older eyes for projecting a strange breed of birds of mismatching but incredibly colored plumage. Also, the picture wisely does let the kids do most of the talking, and some of the lengthier personal testimonies are interesting.Some are funny, some touching and some jolting. In one sequence, showing several hippie "weddings," performed amid a spirited mob in San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury section, the "minister" asks the bridegroom the wilt-thou question. "You know it, man," he answers. Another hippie bridegroom replies, "Yeh."The most impressive bit is a thoughtful soliloquy by a teen-age mother, clutching at her small boy and flanked by other relaxed hippies in a sylvan retreat called Strawberry Fields. All of them, excluding the child, are casually sharing an unfiltered cigarette.Some of the other discourses are almost as effective, such as when the camera picks out some scowling peace-parade marchers, all of whom advocate universal love and the end of the killing in Vietnam. However, what might have given the movie its candid power and point is blunted, since this sequence is theatrically rigged by the director and the footage editor.The phoniest rigging of all is the breathless, garish framework for some testimonies on narcotics with most of the unseen users stressing escapism rather than habit, as the camera swirls in abstract colors and electronic strings twang away. And finally, not one person from the other side of the spiritual moat, young or old, gets to open his mouth, although a clean-cut young Navy recruit bound for Vietnam almost makes it after a scalding put-down by a stringy-haired hippie.The general tone and content of this film are pinpointed by one scribbled hippie slogan fleetingly caught by the camera: "Like father, like son, like hell."





































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































SAY this for "First to Fight," an old-style, flag-waving tribute to marine valor in World War II, which Warners unveiled yesterday. It has every war cliché except the soldier comic from Brooklyn and possibly the Crossing of the Delaware. Maybe the smoke hid that one.There is every good reason why Warners, at a time when World War II seems remote and Vietnam so very real, should have packaged a patriotic reminder of the past. As a matter of fact, the picture is exactly the kind the studio rolled out after Pearl Harbor.There's this clean-cut, stalwart winner of the Distinguished Service Cross, Chad Everett, who is pulled back to the States for a war-bond tour, when he marries a pretty girl. Feeling guilt as a boot-camp instructor, he manages to rejoin the guys back in the Pacific, freezes in fear in a major battle (the thought of his wife, to the strains of "As Time Goes By"), then straightens up and saves the day.The picture has two big, noisy, churning battle scenes that are pips, as directed by Christian Nyby. But all the rest, for all its sincerity, is strictly standard. Mr. Everett, Marilyn Devin, Dean Jagger and Gene Hackman do what they can. But, in an oddly affecting scene with Mr. Everett and Miss Devin watching the old "Casablanca." Ingrid Bergman, Humphrey Bogart and Dooley Wilson do better and did better.






























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































