

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































THE purity, simplicity and numbing power of "A Face of War," a feature documentary of American combat troops in Vietnam, render it one of the most authentic, intimate and remarkable war records ever put on film. The picture that went on yesterday at the Greenwich and Cinema Studio Theaters is an extraordinary thing to see and, more so, to feel.To make it, the American director-producer, Eugene S. Jones, and three college technicians spent 97 days in 1966 with Mike Company, 3d Battalion of the 7th Marine Regiment.There is no narration, no musical score, no glimpse of the enemy, except for a few corpses, and no editing attempt to slant a preachment against anything other than the acute actuality caught by the camera and the sound track. As such, it is a sermon on human waste that draws the viewer into a void as objectively as any war movie ever made.Most of the time the camera rides the shoulders of the point squad of the company, half of whom were either killed or wounded during the filming. And the camera and the men themselves, in their cryptic utterances and facial reactions, tell the whole story, from the opening scene, when a hand loads a rifle, to the fadeout, when the silhouetted survivors trudge into a graying twilight.Even more than "The Anderson Platoon," that excellent television documentary released for movie-theater showings, "A Face of War" conveys the tedium and apathy of warfare, alongside an almost methodical acceptance of sudden attack and death.Toward the middle, a grinning G.I., watching his buddies deliver a native baby, drawls: "Got four of my own but this is the first, time I ever seen one come. Moments later, a big sergeant, holds another infant aloft and flashes a smile, surrounded by babbling natives.On the heels of this comes an abrupt bombing and the sight of the men in almost ritualistic frenzy, edging forward and tending their wounded. "Please take me home!" moans one youth, his leg in shreds, in the most significant line of the film.Other vignettes are also unforgettable, such as a spirited game of football in the mud and mire between pitched tents, where one lounging man listlessly switches a Hanoi radio station listing American wounded to a blaring "Jingle Bells."The viewer is there, helplessly, smack in the middle of it all, in one stealthy night patrol, another thunderous night battle punctuated with unintelligible shouts and cricket chirping, and one revealing scene when the squad evacuates some villagers by truck. "C'mon, men," says a voice, "let's get out and help them. There's some old people down there."The picture has a brief postscript, set to a folk ballad about Vietnam, of live clips identifying the most familiar soldiers, only two of whom are over 21. The distributor of the film is Commonwealth United Entertainment. "A Face of War" is truly memorable.


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































THE narration of "Far From Vietnam" is of such serene banality and ugliness that it might have been written by a misprogramed spokesman for the military-industrial complex. But if the narration were cut—and I seriously think it is impossible for anyone concerned with facts, or words or the war to sit through it—the result might be interesting, a kind of rambling partisan newsreel collage. The film represents a collaboration by six directors (Alain Resnais, Claude Lelouch, Jean-Luc Godard, William Klein, Joris Ivens and Agnes Varda) who wanted to do a work of antiwar (or more accurately, anti-U.S. involvement in the Vietnamese war) propaganda, without spending much thought or effort on it.There is a fine short interview with Ho Chi Minh, in which he says Vietnam can wait as long as it takes, and an interview with Fidel Castro, in which he says that a guerilla war that has the support of the people is the only force stronger than the new technology. There is a very moving conversation between a Vietnamese lady living in Paris and Mrs. Norman Morrison, widow of the American Quaker who burned himself to death to protest the war; it becomes clear why this strange gesture of most extreme nonviolence meant a great deal in many lives.But there are so many easy ironies: A television commercial for Band-Aids juxtaposed with war scenes, with more television commercials in case anyone missed the point; a broken film from the defective camera of Michele Ray in Vietnam, with a suggestion that a broken film is what makes the best sort of statement about the war, "the cry that [Miss Ray] would have wanted to utter"; a sneaking endorsement of violence in the name of peace, or race, or poverty, or powerlessness — or, in fact, anything that is not U.S. foreign policy.Shots of demonstrations in New York, in Paris, even clips of "La Chinoise." It is all too facile and slipshod and stereotyped—designed to enrage one cliché cast of mind against the Administration and another against the enragés. The movie has, in any case, been overtaken by events. The last thing we need now is political stereo-types in a rage. A broken film doesn't really make the best statement about anything. Or utter a cry.The movie, which opened yesterday for a one-week run at the New Yorker Theater, was shown at last year's New York Film Festival.

























































































































































"THE GREEN BERETS" is a film so unspeakable, so stupid, so rotten and false in every detail that it passes through being fun, through being funny, through being camp, through everything and becomes an invitation to grieve, not for our soldiers or for Vietnam (the film could not be more false or do a greater disservice to either of them) but for what has happened to the fantasy-making apparatus in this country. Simplicities of the right, simplicities of the left, but this one is beyond the possible. It is vile and insane. On top of that, it is dull.The film, directed by John Wayne and nominally based on a novel by Robin Moore, has no hero. It is vaguely about some Green Berets, led by John Wayne, trying to persuade Wayne's idea of a liberal journalist (David Janssen) that this war is a fine thing for Vietnam and for America. The movie has human props taken from every war film ever made: a parachute jump; an idea of Vietcong soldiers, in luxury, uniform, champagne and caviar, apparently based on the German high command; a little Asian orphan named Hamchunk, pronounced Hamchuck but more like Upchuck than anything; battle scenes somewhere between "The Red Badge of Courage" and "The Dirty Dozen"; a pathetically dying dog.There is inadvertent humor: "He's dying," a Negro medic says, thoughtfully spooning Jim Beam bourbon down the throat of an elderly Oriental. "Poor old thing can't even keep his rice down any more." What is clearly an Indian extra in a loincloth somehow straggles in among the montagnards. A Vietcong general is dragged from a bed of sin (which, through an indescribable inanity of the plot, the Green Berets have contrived for him) with his trousers on. He is subsequently drugged and yanked off into the sky on a string dangling from a helicopter. A Green Beret points out to the journalist some American-made punji sticks (the movie is obsessed with punji sticks): "Yup," the Green Beret says, "it's a little trick we learned from Charlie. But we don't dip them in the same stuff he does."What the movie is into is another thing entirely. What is sick, what is an outrage and a travesty is that while it is meant to be an argument against war opposition—while it keeps reiterating its own line at every step, much as soap operas keep recapitulating their plots—it seems so totally impervious to any of the questions that it raises. It is so full of its own caricature of patriotism that it cannot even find the right things to falsify. No acting, no direction, no writing, no authenticity, of course. But it is worse. It is completely incommunicado, out of touch. It trips something that would outrage any human sensibility, like mines, at every step and staggers on.The first Green Beret comes on speaking German, to show his versatility in languages. When the VC have just been sprayed with flames, a Green Beret is asked about his apparent affinity for this kind of thing. "When I was a kid," he says modestly, "my dad gave me a chemistry set. And it got bigger than both of us." When the VC, nonetheless, win the Special Forces camp in hand-to-hand combat, a soldier calls in air support. "It'll only take a minute," he says, like a dentist, as the VC are mowed down from the air. The journalist, "the former skeptic about the war," the press kit synopsis chooses to say at this point, "leaves to write about the heroic exploits of the American and South Vietnamese forces."The point is that Wayne is using spoken German, lunatic chemistry sets, machine killing of men who have won fairly hand-to-hand, without apparently noticing that this is not exactly the stuff of which heroic fantasies are made. This is crazy. If the left-wing extremist's nightmare of what we already are has become the right-wing extremist's ideal of what we ought to be we are in steeper trouble than anyone could have imagined. The movie opened yesterday at the Warner Theater.











































































































































































































































































































































































































"TELL ME LIES," which opened yesterday at the 34th Street East, is a movie straight out of the psychodrama left. Based on the London theatrical production "US," directed by Peter Brook and featuring the cast of the Royal Shakespeare Company, it is dedicated to the idea that a group of young actors, disturbed about the existing social order and the war in Vietnam, can make some significant contribution to the subject by saying and doing whatever comes into their minds.It is an extremely trivial enterprise. There is no question of acting, since the young people are, in effect, playing themselves. And there is no question of directing or camerawork, since Brook (who made "Marat/Sade" with the same company) allows the camera to rove meaninglessly from fresh, sincere faces speaking directly into it, through documentary material clipped from newsreels, into little discussion groups posed for set pieces.What the actors do is to go to demonstrations, parties, movies, Buddhist shrines and psychiatrists to discuss their personal problems over Vietnam. They also sing bad, cheery, original antiwar songs and do skits, including a re-enactment of the last days of Norman Morrison, the American Quaker who burned himself to death at the Pentagon.They contemplate a picture of a wounded child swathed in bandages; "How long can you look at this before you lose interest?" one of them asks. (The movie itself lasts two minutes short of two hours.) They consider life's deeper problems. "You bear a really frightening amount of individual responsibility," a girl says of everyone. "I couldn't kick a nun," says another girl, an otherwise violence-oriented Maoist.There is a sad interview with Stokely Carmichael. who seems to have become—since his days as an intelligent young man of courage—as clearly an actor as any member of the cast. For the rest, the direction is as unintelligent as the dialogue. Heads are cropped near the top of the screen, the camera lingers aimlessly on faces for long, idle, inarticulate sequences. The whole movie reflects the banal assumption that feeling is incompatible with reason (as though mindless, emotional types have not always been the first to follow any display of naked power that comes along).The color, except for some black-and-white sequences, is striking and clean; there is one good scene near the movie's end, when an actor's stomach serves as a television screen for the war. The rest is abysmal and boring—as though slapdash work had a special authenticity, and the Angry Arts had an obligation to make even less sense than anybody else.




































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































ROBERT KRAMER, a man who obviously believes in political engagement, takes a strangely oblique—and in many ways disturbing—look at the not-so-new-left in "The Edge," his second feature film but his first to receive commercial release.This spare, talky but often provocative film does not focus on the doers, the organizers, but generally on the dropouts from activtism and specifically on one young man. He believes he can become re-engaged only by committing a completely irrational act: He plans to kill the President of the United States.The picture, written and directed by the 27-year-old Mr. Kramer, opened here yesterday at the New Cinema Playhouse, the underground cinema's first-run Manhattan showcase.The theme of the film is stated by the one character in the movie who has not yet been totally neutralized by his frustrations.This young man, a former civil rights worker who is rather half-heartedly planning to organize a campus draft resistance movement, says at one point:"I know there's a war going on and I know it's bad, but I don't know how to take what I believe and make something happen."That's also the cry of America's would-be-committed middle class, which, intentionally or not, is the group Mr. Kramer is making his film about.His characters—Village intellectuals, artists, sometimes activists and their wives and mistresses—are all comparatively fat cats. Their pads, for the most part, are sleazily typical—sling chairs, lumpy looking beds and cardboard coffee containers for ash trays—but nobody is activated by a need as basic as hunger. Rather, they seem to be anesthetized as much by boredom and their own basic affluence as by the paradoxes of the contemporary war-peace society.This, it seems to me, is the only way to explain the utter lethargy that greets the announcement of one of their friends that he plans to kill the President to atone for the killing in Vietnam. Some attempts are made to talk the assassin out of his plan, and even he agrees that it is senseless. But his friends do nothing to prevent the act, either to save their friend—who seems to have flipped over the edge of sanity—or their own causes, to say nothing of preventing a rather superfluous murder in Washington.Although Mr. Kramer's intellectual approach is oblique, his film style is nothing if not frontal. He snoots in an economical, cinema vérité manner, in the apartments, on the streets, on the highways, on the beaches and in the countryside. His characters talk almost constantly, sometimes on camera, sometimes only on the soundtrack. Unfortunately, the latter is often fuzzy, but this has its own authenticity. So does much of the dialogue, even at its most puerile, and the grainy black-and-white photography.The actors, none of whom are well known, do not so much act as appear as the embodiments of various attitudes and positions. Most prominent are Jack Rader, as the ill-fated assassin, destined, of course, to fail; Tom Griffin, as the young man who continues, doggedly, to work as an organizer, and Paul Hultberg, as the comparatively settled—he has wife and child—guru of this cell of lost revolutionists."The Edge" is not poetic. Rather it is noteworthy as one of the few examples of underground cinema totally committed to the social-political scene.

























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































NOTHWITHSTANDING the protests of 33 members of the House of Representatives, the National Educational Television's presentation of the film on North Vietnam and an accompanying discussion was a useful and thoroughly defsnsible exercise in television journalism."The N.E.T. Journal," seen locally over Channel 13, offered first an abridged version of "North Vietnam—A Personal Report," a film made a year ago by Felix Greene, a British subject, and then a dialogue between Dr. Robert A. Scalapino, professor of political science at the University of California at Berkeley, and David Schoenbrun, correspondent and lecturer at Columbia University who has visited North Vietnam.Mr. Greene's film, already seen in motion-picture theaters, is a photographically superior work in depicting how the North Vietnamese have rallied against United States air attacks. The use of manual labor to meet the destructive technical power of the United States was well worth the watching, even if Mr. Greene's sympathies for the North Vietnamese could hardly be questioned. The footage showing land laid waste was too extensive and sometimes too moving for one to doubt that the devastation has been substantial.The apprehensions of the Congressman that N.E.T. was peddling enemy propaganda fail to take into account the balanced perspective that immediately followed from the lips of Dr. Scalapino. The professor quickly enumerated crucial points that the film did not cover and argued frankly that the Minister of Information in Hanoi could not have asked for a more pleasing document.But the value of the program which after all was not the first to offer enemy films on TV from North Vietnam sources, came in the subsequent discussion. Mr. Schoenbrun was an able and provocative catalyst for the stimulating considerations of the issues that so severely divide the nation and Dr. Scalapino was brilliantly articulate in the detailed analysis of his viewpoint of the war.For the viewer the advantage was that, using the film as a news peg, "N.F.T. Journal" presented one of the better and more lucid discussions of both Mr. Schoenbrun's doubts over the wisdom of American policy in southeast Asia and Dr. Scalapino's specific answers. The division of viewpoint constituted an intellectually provocative and educational dialogue that contained opinions of value to the set owner regardless of his personal feelings.In this respect the program convincingly showed that the freedom of TV is essential to the formation of constructive public opinion, something that protesting Congressmen dishearteningly failed to comprehend. N.E.T. was right and the members of the House wrong. Free discussion is infinitely preferable to the specter of censorship by self-appointed guardians of the public minds.Dick McCutcheon of "N.E.T. Journal" was the unobtrusive moderator.Rowan and MartinThe increasing liberality and topicality of Hollywood variety comedy was further evidenced last night in the hour of Dan Rowan and Dick Martin, whose "Laugh In" had a preseason tryout and now has deservedly won a niche as a regular series at 8 P. M. Mondays over the National Broadcasting Company's network. Rowan and Martin are N. B. C.'s answer to the Smothers Brothers of the Columbia Broadcasting System.Mr. Rowan and Mr. Martin might be likened to the overseers of a swinging 1968 version of "Hellzapoppin.'" Their hour is an extraordinarily quick succession of sight laughs and sketches, many with a deft and good-natured satirical edge to give the show a contemporary pertinency.Unlike the heavy-handed "That Was the Week That Was" but like the tone of the Smothers Brothers, Rowan and Martin are showmen enough to realize that they can needle most of the passing scene if only they do not forget their role as humorists.In the course of the program there were references that undoubtedly would have stung Gov. Ronald Reagan of California. The day was envisioned when Howard Hughes would buy the Grand Canyon to hang new portraits. There was a tongue-in-cheek ode to the Establishment and mention of a modern spiritual leader, Bobby Baker. The popularity of marijuana and sexual freedom among the youth were introduced in one guise or another. The program hinted at a bombing de-escalation when the Vietcong reached the suburbs of Paris.Individually, the quips would not seem too unusual outside the context of television, but on the home screen they certainly, represented a significant departure from video's traditional devotion to timeless banality in variety.Rowan and Martin, who boast a good supporting company of fellow stage conspirators, and the Smothers Brothers could represent the deepest TV change of the current season. The sacred cows of today's society no longer are immune to the irreverence of the newer school of comedians, and it will be important to see how far their influence and ingenuity may spread.In a recent syndicated radio program, Alan King, the comedian, suggested that one reason some viewers might be turning away from TV was its isolation from the realities of the surrounding world. The restless humorists ironically may be the instrument for gradually and subtly bringing TV into the mainstream of modern concern. And the Establishment may possibly have more to fear in the long run from the contagion of laughter than from the more publicized stern protest.































"SEBASTIAN," which opened yesterday at the 68th Street Theater and other houses, is what might be called a medium saturation put-on. A high saturation put-on would be a film like "Modesty Blaise," in which plot, dialogue and décor feature an invention a minute in the hope that something will work. A really low saturation put-on would be any of the films of Andy Warhol, in which the invention is at absolute zero, and the complete put-on is that there is really nothing there to be put-on by.Sebastian (played by Dirk Bogarde) is an Oxford mathematician and master decoder for British Intelligence. He has a large staff of young women working for him at rows of desks, which he can see through the picture window of his office one flight up. He is in the habit of chanting with his female staff, responsively:"And when we finish?""Everybody goes home!""And when do we finish?""Never!"This is chanted with enormous hilarity, as though everyone was having such good fun. And one of the problems with this sort of movie is the enormous pressure that it puts on the audience to have a good time over almost nothing. The music, in particular, becomes hysterically jaunty at moments when absolutely nothing is going on on the screen. ("Modesty Blaise," in which some hysterically jaunty action was going on all the time, was even less relaxed, and therefore worse.)Sebastian has a middle-aged leftist assistant (Lili Palmer) who objects to the Vietnam war, and a dipsoaniacal Saturday mistress (Janet Munro), who, in the service of a foreign power, freaks him out on LSD. These are the two with-it contemporary touches.For the rest, he is pursued to his bedroom by Susannah York. She ultimately has a baby by him—a very interesting looking, not at all soap-commercial baby, whose rattle helps him break a Russian satellite blip code. He also has some scenes with Sir John Gielgud, as Head of Intelligence.The put-on, of course, consists in never really letting the audience know what level of seriousness the film is at, and the movie itself sometimes seems unsure. Apropos of Vietnam: "In these days, all sane loyalties are divided." Apropos of nothing in particular: "Ha, bloody, Ha." Apropos of Bogarde's slapping Miss York in a bedroom scene: "You are in a bad way, aren't you." This last is really rather poignant in context, and the film stops for a moment at sad-modern serious.Miss York gets slapped once, Miss Munro twice. (The put-on as a form is almost always extremely hostile to women.) Miss York does quite well as the sort of against-his-will, healthy seductress she is meant to play; but some scenes in which she has to fight Bogarde physically (and he has lines like "Don't rupture yourself") would be impossible for anyone. Bogarde plays his usual dry, reserved, slightly sinister part, which is so ill-suited to comedy. Gielgud's part is really a walk-on.It is unfortunate to be hard on this sort of British product, which is so much better, funnier, and more articulate than its American equivalent (the latest bumbling Dean Martin extravaganza, "How to Save A Marriage—and Ruin Your Life," comes to mind). The decoding idea, for instance, is a good one, although absolutely nothing is made of it; and some of the lines are lovely. Of Sebastian's LSD experience, Gielgud says, "Well, we all need taking out of ourselves from tune to time."The opening scene, in which Bogarde is racing around Oxford in his academic robes until he meets Miss York and asks her to spell her name backward, has a fine White Rabbit/Alice in Wonderland quality, which is immediately abandoned, too. If only people wouldn't try to spoof everything at once, but concentrate on doing a thought-out funny thing or two.














































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































EDGAR SNOW, an enthusiast about Communist China, has put together some old film he took in China 30 years ago and some 1965 film in which he is often a principal figure as a welcome visitor to the country. This documentary-style, but not exactly documented, picture opened last, night at the Bleecker Street Cinema.Mr. Snow calls it "The China Story: One-Fourth of Humanity." A viewer who reads the papers about the Red Guards and the cultural revolution and so on may feel the subtitle should have been "One-Fourth of the Story."The impressive thing about the picture is the sense that a lot of people with good intentions and love of their country have worked fruitfully in field, factory and the arts, a one-sided picture but still a pleasure to contemplate. Of course, the terraced fields made in the Chinese hills at immense pain by a commune look as fine as, but not better, than similar fields made a few years earlier in the Judean hills by an Israeli kibbutz.Inspiring as such examples of Communist China's accomplishments are, the somewhat limited glimpses they give of the vastness of the country and its problems lead to questions. The picture is all as pretty as the color in the more recent footage, apparently the work of one Chu Kai-chu.Since Mr. Snow himself is in the 1965 footage as the foreign correspondent at work, a viewer wishes that he had done some hard probing. Talking to lovely working girls, Mao Tse-tung and similar representative Chinese, he asks smiling questions and receives graciously phrased propaganda.A girl commenting on shots of athletic feats by some of her colleagues says that the country has world records to its credit—unfairly ignored by the West—and that the athletes are good because they study the books of Mao Tse-tung.Mr. Snow's narration includes bits like the comment, after a scene proving that there are still some Christians in China, that the Chinese in general are impressed that Christian American bombs are falling on Vietnam. This, the comment goes on, makes the Chinese eager to join the militia.A glimpse of a mushroom cloud ascending after a Chinese atom bomb explosion is followed by a comment that Chou En-lai says all the bombs should be destroyed and nuclear energy used for peaceful purposes—and the camera switches to a handsome institutional home for older workers.Mr. Snow sounds out Mr. Mao as to who is really in charge, but the Chinese leader does not reply with anything newsworthy. Mr. Snow appears, on the whole, to have been Mr. Mao's friendly visitor in 1965 rather than an inquiring reporter.An accompanying ballet film, made by the Peking Film Studio in 1957, shows some very acrobatic warriors of olden times slicing away at one another. This delightful half-hour of dancing gives more of a representation of conflict, advance and retreat and historic outcome than Mr. Snow's documentary.













































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































THE idea of a kind of comic-strip movie romp satirically thrusting at certain aspects of the American scene somehow seems apt during the holiday season. But "Greetings," a free-wheeling exercise put together by a group of chaps in their 20's, is way off target. This modest but blandly assured little picture, nimbly photographed in good color, opened yesterday at the 34th Street East Theater.What we have here is a trio of hippie-talking pals adventurously prowling the streets of New York and New Jersey, linking up with a succession of enigmatic girls and aiming some splintery, incoherent monologues at each other and, occasionally, the camera. Some of it is amusing, as when one of the lads is coached in the technique of draft-dodging. Most of it is strained and unfunny, with some generous nudity for nudity's sake and a hip sprinkling of four-letter words.One subject of mockery is President Johnson, who is shown in a newsreel clip defending his position on Vietnam. And a smirking actor named Gerritt Graham prances through the picture trying to disprove the findings of the Warren Commission. A typical disgusting scene shows him using a nude girl to tape-measure a simulated bullet trajectory.Of his pals, Robert De Niro and Jonathan Warden, the latter gives at least some evidence of a little talent. There's no doubt that young Brian De Palma, who directed, and Charles Hirsch, his producer, are determined and camera-minded. Next time they might try for something that matters instead of the tired, tawdry and tattered.











































































"SHAME," which opened yesterday at the Fine Arts Theater, is Ingmar Bergman's fable about war. Dry, beautifully photographed, almost arid in its inspiration, it concerns a couple of former musicians, Liv Ullmann and Max Von Sydow, who are caught on an island in the middle of an insurrection in 1971. They are not getting on well, they do not care who wins, and even the war fails to intensify anything about their lives. Von Sydow is a coward, increasingly debased as the film and the war go on by his completely unheroic, now virtually incomprehensible, determination to remain alive.The "Shame" of the title is God's. "What if that person should wake up one morning and be ashamed of what he had done?" one of the characters says. "That person" is God. The war is no longer a moral context. It is part of the order of things, the sides are not defined, no one is responsible for it. Bergman has moved, exhausted, straight out of the human condition to take on the universe again. He is getting to be the Job of directors, in the tired, outraged realm at the edge of things where there is nothing to be said.Against the dull, authentic pounding of guns, Miss Ullmann and Von Sydow are rounded up, first by one side (for a dubbed, forged interview of solidarity), then by the other (to be abused for the interview). They become friends, for all the good it does them, with a colonel, Gunnar Bjornstrand, whom Miss Ullmann sleeps with, in a kind of tribute to his desperation. They take ferries on their nameless island very like—in their quotidian indifference to the soldiers aboard, the war around—the ferries in the delta of Vietnam.Miss Ullmann, in her wish to have a baby, her impatience with her lover's lack of courage, her kindness to strangers, Is the only one still grounded in any humanity at all. By the end, they set off in a boat through a sea littered with military corpses for the mainland or another island, where, presumably, there will be another war. "Shame" could be a film about the tenacity of civilians, but it is more like a document just before extinction. There is no strength in it. It is at Bergman's wits' end. Even the idea that a childless couple would go to such limits of energy simply not to die is not self-evident or even convincing any more.



























"MONTEREY POP," which was shown last night at Lincoln Center and which will open early in January at the Kips Bay Theater, is a contemporary music film—in the relatively fresh tradition of "Festival" and "Don't Look Back." The movie, filmed by Richard Leacock and D. A. Pennebaker, with the collaboration of Albert Maysles and other independent filmmakers, is an upbeat, color documentary of the 1967 pop-music festival in Monterey, Calif. It stars the Mamas and the Papas, the Jefferson Airplane, Ravi Shankar, the Who and other singing groups. From the moment Scott Mackenzie's "If you're going to San Francisco" comes onto the track and screen, it is clear that this is one good way to do a musical.There is all that shiny hair, orangeade, beautiful hands, shades, watermelon, shoeless feet in tights, flowers papers, dogs, the wrinkled bottom of Ravi Shankar's tapping foot, psychedelic blobs behind the podium, smoke effects behind the infernal Who, mouths approaching microphones, eyes in all those various, distinct, serious young faces, which—10 years ago, before the seriousness of Vietnam began—we didn't seem to have. The photography is pretty well coordinated with the sound, sometimes blinded by strobe lights, so that the screen goes absolutely white, sometimes shifting down lines of audience in a kind of "Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead" focus of attention on characters other than the main.There are the lyrical songs, "California Dreamin'" and Simon and Garfunkel's "Feeling Groovy." Janis Joplin straining her voice and being to sing black. Then there is a kind of spot, purely visual interview — a beard and a cop laughing, wordlessly teasing each other; a girl from Champaign, Ill., feeling lucky to be allowed to wipe the folding chairs between performances, a Hell's Angel arriving at the Shankar concert that is the long, wound up climax of the film. There are rock violinists and young people dressed like pageant potentates."We all love each other, right?" Otis Redding shouts, half ironic, half intimidating. "Right," the audience replies. Jimmie Hendrix goes through his thing of somersaulting, then being irreverently, frantically obscene with his guitar, finally destroying it—presaging in a fairly violent way, the quality of the kisses of Tiny Tim.But the nicest thing about the movie is not its musical or nostalgic qualities, but the way it captures the pop musical willingness to hurl yourself into things, without all the What If (What if I can't? What if I make a fool of myself?) joy action-stopping self-consciousness of an earlier generation, a willingness that can somehow co-exist with the idea of cool. Also, musically and photographically, the harmonies, the resolutions of chaos after everything looks as though it is going to fall apart."Once you leave here you may not re-enter," a guard at the festival says to some members of the audience at the gate. It is possible that the way to a new kind of musical—using some of the talent and energy of what is still the most lively contemporary medium—may begin with just this kind of musical performance documentary.
























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































A CONVINCING and disturbing case against American intervention in Vietnam is being made by a documentary feature at the Bleecker Street Cinema titled "17th Parallel: Vietnam and War." Fortifying this tonic effect is a half-hour supplement called "Vietnam Dialogue," in which the seasoned David Schoenbrun simply states his own views on the matter, and most forcefully so.The eloquence and power of the feature lies in its on-the-spot crudeness and unquestionable authenticity. Joris Ivens, a highly respected Dutch documentary-maker, has captured a close-quarter camera record of the war as weathered by determined peasants and their families, united with tough guerrillas and all under North Vietnamese Army leadership.The camera glues to these people, whether in action or taking a break during interviews by the photographer and others behind the camera. Their replies, and some effective soliloquies, spoken both in Vietnamese and French (by the Army officers) are given sparse but succinct English titles.It is a small wonder, considering the emphatic anti-Americanism of tone and content, that Mr. Ivens and his assistant, Marceline Loridan, were abetted by the Hanoi Documentary Studio. Nearly every utterance, by young and old, denounces the American "bandits" methodically and fiercely.We see armed farmers tending rice paddies fully armed and stoically squatting (a camouflage strategy) as planes roar overhead, a sound that punctuates most of the picture. There is the incredibly determined hand-to-mouth organization of the peasants, cheerfully burrowing into underground shelters with makeshift schools and even hospitals. The most blood-curdling part of the film, replete with horrifying shots to the dead and wounded, shows some underground children, mere toddlers, being taught how to handle captured Americans. "Hands up, not hand up," corrects the teacher.It looks and sounds real and frightening, with plenty of food for thought.

















































