




































































































































































































ANDY WARHOL'S "Blue Movie" is heterosexual pornography, somewhat more cheerful than the sort of thing shown at smokers, much longer (105 minutes) than the usual stag films, and fitted out with lots of random talk about such subjects as athlete's foot, Vietnam, cops, Nixon, Lindsay, termites and praying mantises.In its crucial moments, it's just as cold and mechanical as any conventional blue movie, principally because it's impossible to be a third party in such circumstances and not feel slightly absurd, aware of physical details that—once seen—really aron't very interesting in themselves. I don't think that "Blue Movie" will have an adverse effect on any normal, coping, neurotic adult, but then I don't think it will enrich one's consciousness, except at the chaotic speed with which our public morality is changing, and of the Warhol continuum, a life style and a body of work that are as indigenously American as commercial television."Blue Movie" pretends to dramatize sex as the ultimate act of political protest, which, I suppose, it does, as would any movie—even one about water skiing—in which the characters are so preoccupied with one specific activity that they have no time for anything else. According to a program note, "Blue Movie" is "a film about the Vietnam war and what we can do about it." By this same reasoning, it's a film about air pollution, vivisection, campus reform, the cause of the Count of Paris and stamp collecting, and what can we do about them, which is, as I understand it, nothing.Warhol, who is a master in the art of reversals, structures his blue movie more or less backwards. It opens with a medium close-up of Viva, looking rather more fit than usual (and sometimes even beautiful), and Louis Waldon, a pleasant, stocky, 30-ish man, fully clothed, wrestling on a bed. Without too much hesitation they make love, then talk a great deal, have some hamburgers, talk, take a shower—all of which, of course, dramatizes what we can do about Vietnam.Having experimented—not very effectively—with cuts between close-ups, long-shots and even panoramic vistas in "Lonesome Cowboys," filmed in chilly Arizona exteriors, Warhol in "Blue Movie" returns to the confined interior landscapes (bedroom, bath and kitchen) that he knows best, most of the time alternating between tight and medium close-ups.Some of the images—not the clinical ones—are quite good, pure nudes caught in the time and space available only to the movie camera. For the most part, it all looks quite impersonally improvised, except for a startling moment near the end that may be a sort of minimal hommage to Truffaut and "Stolen Kisses." Waldon, in profile close to camera, repeats "I love you, I love you, I love you," while, in the background Viva goes about the ritual of getting dressed, fixing her hair and, in general, behaving like a real woman. Stag films aren't supposed to be sweet."Blue Movie," which is literally a cool, greenish-blue in color, opened yesterday at the Andy Warhol Garrick Theater.








































































"THE GAY DECEIVERS," which struggles with the comparatively new movie twist of feigned homosexuality as a draft dodging gimmick, is, unfortunately, neither gay nor deceptive. Although it is pleasingly multicolored, this decidedly juvenile caper evolves as a colorless case of a couple of young swingers, whose involved efforts to avoid Uncle Sam's tour of Vietnam, is neither funny nor serious.Amid what can be assumed to be plush California country-club surroundings, our heroes—a designing pre-law student and his handsome, bronzed, muscled lifeguard pal — con their draft board colonel into thinking they are delicate bosom buddies. In order to make this temporary deferment permanent they even rent a cozy, plush cottage done up in hot pinks and torrid reds by its owner, an authentic lacy type.Why this colonel would single them out for personal investigation is difficult to comprehend but he's an indomitable sleuth who gives our boys all kinds of headaches.The hectic business of eluding him, the student's suspicious fiancée and his parents—as well as some panting girls who turn up at this unlikely pad—becomes a witless charade with practically everyone a loser.Kevin Coughlin, a former child actor, grapples unsuccessfully with the role of the harried student who is hardly a grownup no matter what the script says. Larry Casey, a newcomer, is more photogenic than convincing as the masquerading lifeguard who, like his buddy, ends up a woebegone reject.There is a parade of young girls frequently in bikinis and sexily hip enough to titillate the red-blooded boys. And, the producers rate a credit for including a gay party thrown by Michael Greer, an amusing performer, as the owner of the cottage that should please that division of our voters. Mr. Greer sashays about the premises in a frilly, mod get-up as he introduces a pair of lisping guests as "Myra Broken-bridge" and "Judy Streisand."But the gaiety is rare. "Living with you," Mr. Coughlin angrily berates his roommate, "is just a series of bad jokes." Call it a precise summation by a pre-law student for the case of "The Gay Deceivers."








































































































































































































SURE, Vietnam and primaries can plague a body. But "The Devil's Eight" and "Killers Three" loudly prove that in the South, where moonshiners and revenuers still don't mix, we've got a real problem, especially for moviegoers who value their hearing. The hillbillies and other hard types who crashed onto local screens yesterday expend enough muscle and firepower to take Omaha Beach in a pair of elementary adventures as flimsy as cartoons."Killers Three," which makes a vague pass at mountain folklore, has Robert Walker, son of the late actor and Jennifer Jones; Dick Clark, the platter spinner and darling of TV's teen-aged swingers, and Diane Varsi running afoul of the law just after World War II. Seems that Mr. Walker, who doesn't want to haul illicit corn likker no more, tries to steal $200,000 from his boss's safe, with the aid of his wife, Miss Varsi, and of his pal, Clark. They'll all go to California with the loot, where, it says here, the living is easier.Well, it doesn't work and, while our harried trio, according to the background song, "never meant to kill anyone," they leave a pretty bloody trail for the posse to follow. Miss Varsi wistfully loves her little boy, but chooses to follow her man and gets shot for her devotion. Mr. Walker, strikingly reminiscent of his late father in appearance, is simply phlegmatic more often than not. And Mr. Clark, wearing glasses, a mustache and a doleful expression that fits his laconic dialogue, is mowed down in the climactic battle, which, of course, has no connection with the fact that he's also the film's producer."The Devil's Eight" are, for the record, a crew of roadgang convicts, surrepitiously freed by Federal agent Christopher George to get the goods on moonshiner Ralph Meeker and governmental higher-ups on the take. Their training would be worthy of commandos versed in brawling, breakneck car handling, grenade throwing, machine gunning and sundry diversions. It's enough to make a man forget about booze and movie making.The carnage among these unshaven hard guys is continuous, as is the action, under rudimentary direction.Despite the gunfire and the clangorous country-and-West-ern musical backgrounds, "The Devil's Eight" and "Killers Three" merely illustrate that a viewer is shortchanged in these versions of the numbers game.


























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































"PIERROT LE FOU," which opened yesterday at the 72d Street Theater, is one of the humblest and most gentle of Jean-Luc Godard's films. Shot in 1965, before the cracks in the young French director's composure really opened up, the film has seams, murders, auto accidents, political harangues. The hero ultimately wraps his head in dynamite and blows himself to bits. But Pierrot is the "mon ami, Pierrot" from "Au Claire de la Lune" (a song that occurs uninsistently in the score), and a lot of the film's imagery is of the moon and gentle lunacy. It is in part a delicate, sentimental love story, a little on the order of Truffaut.Jean-Paul Belmondo plays Pierrot, a writer whose girl calls him Pierrot, but whose real name, Ferdinand, is emblazoned on his sweatshirt. (He and the film have some of the sweet loser's ironies of Charlie Brown.) The girl is played by Anna Karina, Mr. Godard's first wife, and no film has ever been more loving in its treatment of a star. Miss Karina makes her particular case for life, clothes, dancing, fields, skies, love and a little violence, and the writer makes his abstract case for "Ambition, love, the movement of things, accidents — everything." They have an affair near the sea, with a fox and a parrot for company. They speak of Bernardin de St. Pierre's innocent "Paul et Virginie." They despair of each other.They also have some "Breathless"-style adventures, with many references to Laurel and Hardy, "Johnny Guitar," Michel Simon, "Pepe le Moko" and other cinema presences that are exigently real to the imagination of Godard. The film requires a little patience as it goes its own erratic way. One long drive by night down a highway, with colored lights (the film, shot by Raoul Coutard, is in color) flashing incessantly across the hood and windshield is particularly trying in its affectation. So are the strainings to include a bit of Vietnam and politics. (When Godard is bad, he is terrible:) And the film generates a certain impatience in its oddly felt absence of any scene of sex.But there is so much that is whimsical and beautiful: Pierrot, painting his face blue before he dies, and fumbling, at the last moment, for the fuse; Miss Karina, parodying musicals, unaffectedly singing (the music, ranging from Beethoven to Duhamel, is a careful, thoughtout comment on the script); an incredible, isolated piece of highway overpass abandoned in a field; Mr. Belmondo putting mustard on an immense piece of cheese, during an authentic, cinéma vérité—interview with a frowzy old eccentric who thinks she is the exiled queen of Lebanon; Jean-Pierre Leaud, appearing for one instant, looking baleful, on the screen; a kind of Brechtian bitter, fine misuse of American frames of references, in the "Oh, Moon of Alabama" style; a superb comic turn, about love and refrains in the head, by the Belgian actor Raymond Devos.The film is poetic, quiet, introverted, personal. The writer and Miss Karina have funny, despairing things to say to each other. There is no bravado in the part Belmondo plays this time, or any real violence in Miss Karina's. They are both charming and fed up, an Idiom that sounds richer in French and that is applied in the film to everyone, including the man in the moon. One moving thing is that a director as proud and forceful, as annihilatingly positivist as Godard should make a film this tentative and forbearing about an artist and his girl in love.

















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































IF "Changes" had a culminating dramatic effect equal to its perception and visual beauty, the picture, which arrived yesterday at the 68th Street Playhouse, would be a masterpiece. Even so, it is one of the most imaginative, haunting and artistic movies yet made of contemporary youth at bay. It is a remarkable film and—more than that—a remarkable experience.Written by Bill E. Kelly and Hall Bartlett, with the latter producing and directing, the picture trails a young Candide—a college drop-out from a good family—in a quest for self-fulfillment in today's unsettled society.The film has been photographed against a magnificent sweep of natural background, in superlatively trenchant color, directed with uncommon skill and sensitivity and played by a cast predominantly of unknowns.This Cinerama Corporation release is one of those infrequent pictures that draw you inside from the start, as the open-faced protagonist, Kent Lane, moodily scans a coastline and then speeds over a highway, pinpointed by the camera. Much of the freshness and persuasion of what follows are attributable to young Lane, a manly towhead, in his screen debut.Furthermore, the characterization is neither that of a yowling, bearded hippie nor a professional whiner, but of a disturbed rebel who really matters. In clipped vignettes that often dip into flashback, we see his troubled home in a moving scene with his baffled parents (only Jack Albertson is credited), and his restless college enrolment, before he takes up with a pretty artist, Manuela Thiess. Later, he drifts into a casual involvement with a freelance reporter, Marcia Strassman, and, finally, an extended interlude with a sleazy, understanding girl, exquisitely played by Michele Carey.The movie is entirely credible as the camera scans faces and meaningful details, with much of the footage set to Lane's introspective musings. Time and again, the camera searches beyond the hero, as when he mingles with a hippie assembly and watches Peace-in-Vietnam marchers scuffling with the police. There also is a memorable scene when the hitchhiking hero and his driver hear a radio news summary that ends with details about a black-power riot. Then the driver, a fine-looking Negro, calmly dials off to some music, and the two men smile at each other. They're bored with it all.But a picture that conveys so much, with such skill and beauty, requires a heartrending wallop, not the rather comfortable fadeout. Even so, "Changes," while flawed, is still real and wonderful.


"THE MODEL SHOP," Jacques Demy's first American movie, looks and sounds like a film made by a sensitive tourist. The French director ("The Umbrellas of Cherbourg," "The Young Girls of Rochefort") brings back Lola, the beautiful, emotionally dented leading character of his first movie, and transplants her from Nantes to Los Angeles.Abandoned by her husband, Lola works in a garish little photographic studio—a kind of house of prostitution for the inhibited—where a customer can rent a camera and a girl and take his own pictures.Although Gary Lockwood and Anouk Aimée (the original Lola) are the stars of "The Model Shop," they obviously aren't as important to Demy as Los Angeles. Lockwood, a young, disoriented architect about to go to Vietnam, calls the city "pure poetry," and Demy pictorially defines this in a series of loving, nightmarish explorations of that solid-state grid of boulevards, parking lots, two-story loft buildings, drugstores, supermarkets and beach houses.Demy is almost right. In "The Model Shop" you don't experience Los Angeles as often as you read it, on billboards and neon signs, in a freeze-dried vocabulary of words like Sale, Eat, Wash and Service. Even the dialogue has a linear quality. Speeches sound as if they had originally been long subtitles translating the original French.This is only one of the reasons that nothing in "The Model Shop" quite connects with anything else. The screenplay by Demy ("English dialogue by Adrien Joyce") is as aimless and well-meaning as its characters, who are always getting in and out of automobiles in search of something better, constantly accompanied by music (Bach, rock, Schumann and Rimsky-Korsakov), sometimes heard on the car radios, sometimes—quite arbitrarily—on the soundtrack.Specifically, the movie covers 24 hours in the life of a disenchanted young man (Lockwood), whose affair with a staggeringly dense, would-be actress (Alexandra Hay) is breaking up. He meets Miss Aimée, falls in love with her, and after much coffee house philosophy about war, marriage, love and politics, they part.None of this, however, is as pure or poetic as the city that surrounds them. They talk in big, heavy swatches of exposition, punctuated from time to time by selfconscious messages from the author. "Do I bore you?" Miss Aimée asks during one very long speech, which is the tip-off that Demy knows that we know that the movie has gotten away from him.Miss Aimée is a fine, striking-looking woman, but her natural elegance makes her appearance in the rent-a-girl studio something of a sight gag. (Her leg tendons are rather pronounced for cheesecake work.) Lockwood is good as the young man, but he's always an American actor in what is basically, spiritually, a foreign film. Miss Hay's work can't be precisely evaluated. It's impossible to tell how much of her edgy clumsiness is good acting or inexperience."The Model Shop," which opened yesterday at the Cinema Rendezvous and Loew's Orpheum, is really quite a bad movie, but also a sometimes interesting one. You aren't likely to forget—immediately anyway—a movie in which someone speaks of the "Baroque geometry" of Los Angeles. I know that I won't.



















































































































































































































































































RADLEY METZGER, a tireless promoter of sensationalized sex movies, often with a wisp of artistic camouflage, has scraped a British barrel and come up now with something called "Black on White." It opened yesterday at the Trans-Lux West and Trans-Lux East. As entertainment or art, this Technicolor picture is garbage.Purporting to be a flow of subconscious imagery reflecting the emotions of a London girl who is followed across town by a handsome Negro boy, the footage ladles out the daydreams of this pretty, young birdbrain obsessed with one thing.The images range from phallic to explicit, from dull to sickening, as some of the steamier interludes switch to pious utterances against the Vietnamese War and racial prejudice, and documentary glimpses of slaughterhouses and concentration camp victims. Add some sadistic seasoning, such as a shot of a human eyeball slit with a razor. But sex is the main ingredient, and the sound-track musings of Anita Sanders, as the heroine, are idiotic and eventually filthy.The color itself is quite good. The rock 'n' roll score, boinged out by some seedy-looking hippies we first see perched in a tree like a bunch of vultures, is terrible.Ironically, not only are Miss Sanders and Terry Carter attractive young people, but both give evidence of some acting ability, if they're ever able to crawl out from under this mess.The exhibitors of "Black on White" themselves have given the import a rating of "X—persons under 17 cannot be admitted." Younger moviegoers can take that as a compliment. This time that X means excruciating.


























































































































































































































































































WATCHING new movies these days, I occasionally get the odd feeling that somebody has been tampering with time. Liza Minnelli is the undisputed star of "The Sterne Cuckoo," but the ghost of a youthful Judy Garland, who now seems to have looked very much like Vincente Minnelli, haunts the film in ways that are not at all unpleasant.In "Hail, Hero!" you can see Kirk Douglas, even younger than he was in "The Champion" in 1949, in the person of his 25-year-old son, Michael. This new Douglas has his father's extraordinary, Fearless Fosdick jaw, the suggestion of his dimpled chin and the cool, gentle eyes. He also possesses the almost manic, physical buoyancy that compels attention even when it bears little relation to the circumstances in which the actor finds himself. It's not an especially memorable performance, but it's an energetic one, and without Douglas, "Hail, Hero!" would not even be tolerable."Hail, Hero!," adapted from John Weston's novel, on its surface, is about a flower child who enlists in the Army in order to face and to love the enemy in Vietnam. It is, I suppose, an anti-Vietnam movie, but it's the sort of neutral anti-Vietnam movie that one might expect to find at Radio City Music Hall, where it opened yesterday. This is not meant to knock the Music Hall, or even to imply that the hall has any kind of political bias. It's just that that fine old monument to tourism, art moderne décor and high-kicking has never been known as a citadel of political protest.David Miller, the director, and David Manber, the screenwriter have been unconscionably respectful of Weston's pretentious little novel that preserves the unity of time and place favored by the ancient Greeks. The story, however, owes more to Arthur Miller, on one of his worse days, than it does to Aeschylus.It all takes place on a rich Arizona ranch between one sunup and the next. Carl (Douglas), the younger son of the Dixon clan, has dropped out of his Eastern college and returned home to confront his father (Arthur Kennedy) and older brother, Frank (Peter Strauss), whom he accidentally crippled years before, with the news that he has enlisted.As in Miller's plays, the characters do an awful lot of talking and very little listening, which has always struck me as an especially tiresome theatrical device since the audience has no choice but to listen to everything that is being ignored by the characters.In the novel, Carl's sensitivity was defined by the information that he read Rilke and Beowulf, that he skinny dipped and that he befriended a poor girl named Tinky McSleen, who didn't quite understand Rilke but was moved (if my memory serves) by the sound of the words "on top of each other."In the movie, Carl talks long, expository monologues to tombstones and to stuffed mountain lions, tries to express his love for his father who, instead of listening, cuts off his son's hippie hair, and presents his brother with the mummy of an Indian baby whose skull had been cracked.This gift, which is small in size but heavy with symbolism, is offered by the pacifist to his hawk-like brother with the explanation: "Take a look before you envy my chance to kill."Along about the middle of what is, in effect, the movie's Act Three, people do start listening to each other. "What can I give you?" Frank asks Carl. "Just touch me," says Carl, in one of the film's many curtain lines. Carl spends his last night at home painting the side of his father's barn with a Pop war mural—flowers, bombs, flaming planes and an American flag in which hearts have replaced the stars. In the novel (and in the film before it was recently re-edited), Carl's mother (Teresa Wright) and father joined him in this act of affirmation, which looks more like sentimental lunacy.David Miller, who directed Michael Douglas's father in the equally pretentious but much more stylish "Lonely Are the Brave," never misses an opportunity to state the obvious. This works in his lady-in-distress melodramas ("Midnight Lace," "Sudden Fear"), but it has the effect of turning a genuinely complex situation into a comforting simplistic parable in "Hail, Hero!"You might say that here, at last, is a movie for dove-like hawks and hawk-like doves. It's enough to make one remember "The Green Berets" with fondness.












































































































































































































































































HAVING made a fine documentary dramatizing the downfall of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, Emile de Antonio has now assembled "In the Year of the Pig," a documentary on American involvement in Vietnam. It will nail many people to their seats.There are no frills and few ifs, ands or buts about the stinging, graphic and often frighteningly penetrating movie that arrived yesterday at the New Yorker Theater. Adhering strictly to a dove viewpoint, Mr. de Antonio's picture suggests that we should get out of Vietnam fast. To make his points he uses footage culled from international sources, interspersing, with enormous effectiveness, statements on both sides by political and military leaders, as well as teachers, officials and on-the-spot journalists.Even with its frank slant, the picture is invaluable on two counts. First, it provides a succinct, backward refresher course on our initial Vietnamese involvement, a needed primer for spectators confusingly numbed by the appalling facts of the present. Second, although some of the footage speaks volumes, it is the statements by the men who led us there and those who went there that cut through to the quick.With some of the unseen speakers, a good bit of the footage is random and sketchy, such as a portion on the French-Indochinese war, which is repeatedly likened to our involvement. Some of the vignettes are memorable, such as one little drama involving white-suited colonials and rickshaw coolies. In another clip, some husky American soldiers cavorting on a Vietnamese beach scornfully profess disinterest in native girls, described as a "bunch of slant-eyed gooks." Commenting on a memorial service for American troops, Col. George S. Patton 3d smilingly recalls them as "looking determined and reverent," adding: "But they're still a bloody good bunch of killers."One detailed sequence with a clutter of expressionless natives being firmly shepherded by American soldiers is a microcosm of the Vietnam war. But it is the almost unbroken flow of personal testimonies, for and against our military involvement, that will jolt the viewer, ranging from that given by combat soldiers to those by former President Lyndon B. Johnson and President Nixon.The film ends with the strains of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic" while an American unit agonizingly hobbles into a clearing in the forest bearing its maimed and wounded.


























































































"TERRY WHITMORE, FOR EXAMPLE," which opened yesterday at the Evergreen Cinema, takes a young Marine who has deserted from the Vietnam War and places him in front of a movie camera so that he can tell his own story. Except for a large bottle of Coca-Cola (handy symbolic refreshment) the setting, a room in Sweden, is neutral. And except for some moderately objectionable intercutting among strands in his narration, the filmmaker, Bill Brodie, has kept himself out of the picture.Mr. Whitmore seems to have been allowed to talk about what he wanted, and in his own time. Unfortunately, although he talks a great deal, he has very little to say.Terry Whitmore is a 21-year-old Negro (his word) from Memphis, who enlisted in the Marine Corps after graduating from high school. He was sent to Vietnam and wounded in action. In Japan, where he recuperated from his wounds, he decided to desert rather than return to Vietnam. With the help of a Japanese antiwar group, he was transported across Russia to his present asylum in Sweden.It is a life story more interesting than most, but interesting life stories do not necessarily reveal interesting lives. Mr. Whitmore knows when he is well off, and he seems to have turned his suffering more to profit than to pathos, but he demonstrates a mind without depth or originality, and a personality in which it is difficult to place much confidence.He seems to have hated boot camp and his drill instructors (though anybody who enlists in the Marines presumably asks for what he gets) but not really to resent Vietnam or actual combat. Obviously, he preferred shooting people to having people shoot at him, and when he does indulge in moral scruples about the war it sounds a little too much like a recital of Americal Imperialist Atrocities Against the People of South Vietnam to be believed.His historical analyses are inventive (the United States entered World War II solely to "get a piece of Europe"), but his battle stories are traditional. I don't mean that they are untrue; only that they are utterly uninstructive.I assume that Terry Whitmore deserted because he had been seriously wounded once and didn't feel like taking more dumb chances. This seems reason enough for deserting, but not reason enough for making a movie. "Terry Whitmore, for Example" does not figure effectively as a protest against American involvement in Vietnam. It doesn't even figure effectively as a protest against war, since, from his own description of his previous life, Mr. Whitmore apparently lived most sensitively and vigorously in Vietnam.Cinéma vérité is supposed to reveal character. In this the film succeeds—and succeeds within the first 10 of its 98 minutes. But it is a success without passion, or pleasure, or evident purpose.






































































































































































































































SOONER or later, a provocative movie about American soldier-deserters from Vietnam is bound to emerge from their Swedish sanctuary."Terry Whitmore, for Example," which arrived several weeks ago, seemed pallid stuff. Even more surprising is the hollow, unforceful ring of "Deserter U.S.A.," in which three more young ex-soldiers, named Bill Jones, John Ashley and Mark Shapiro, aim testimonials at the camera, directly and indirectly, while re-enacting their early years of foreign sanctuary.Assembled by two young Swedes, Lars Lambert and Olle Sjogren, the Kanawha Films import opened yesterday at the Garrick Theater.What kills the effect of the picture is the format, which cries out for compression as a candid, documentary-interview television special. Instead, what we see—and hear is a melodrama about three rootless young fugitives roughing it in a new land.The unyielding tone, bordering on paranoia, encompasses some hard-breathing little vignettes depicting cloak-and-dagger menace of the deserters by the Swedish "secret police," the United States Army, the Central Intelligence Agency and some unidentified snoops. With perhaps two exceptions, the nonprofessional status of the entire cast is painfully obvious.What pierces the strangely synthetic flavor of the film, and the sing-song flow of anti-American redundancies, is the fiery-eyed adamancy of its chief spokesman, young Jones, who is never at a loss for words, at least against his native land and its "great war machine."Nor is Sweden spared, initially, after the outspoken three leave a luxurious lakeside villa. Granted a welfare pittance by the watchful and irritated Swedish Government, they form a committee with other American deserters.The typical American deserter's hand-to-mouth existence, underscored by Jones's narration, includes some comfortably appointed rooms, apartments, discothèques and a bustling little printing plant for committee writings. But the majority of complaints by the group of deserters, seconded by their young Sdedish friends, pinpoints the "economic reasons of American imperialism," from Vietnam back to World War II.In the most telling utterance of the moive, a Negro deserter abruptly recalls the arrest of Rap Brown and LeRoi Jones for illegal possession of weapons, adding: "Then when Lester Maddox had weapons down in that restaurant of his, they made him Governor."But at the other extreme it's impossible to swallow the committee's claim of continual harassment by the homeland, from near and afar. In a phone conversation with his mother, one ex-soldier shouts: "Who called you? Who made you call me over here!" Other young men are shown being trailed by "the secret police." Still another one is glimpsed in a street scuffle—"attacked by American tourists."In contrast, a climactic sequence — performed with ceremonial triumph, when the committee "traps" a Central Intelligence Agency man, posing as a journalist—is so absurdly staged and played as to be laughable."Deserter U.S.A." is no laughing matter. But as pertinent, personalized drama, it outweighs principle with prejudice.












































































































































































































































































































GIANNI AMICO, the Italian writer-director whose first feature, "Tropics," opened yesterday at the New Yorker Theater after a single showing at last year's New York Film Festival, is obviously sensitive and angry. But he is callow at making his point about injustice. In focusing on the plight of the mass of Brazil's rootless poor, he illustrates poverty with poetic altruism but is, at best, simply confusing in his oblique preachments about man's inhumanity to man.He employs a fictional approach shot through with documentary-style information about Brazilian economic history (from the sugar cane industry of 16th-century Portuguese to the present, statistics on races and on rates of pay), as well as off-screen and direct screen narration. He takes an impoverished young couple and their two happy children from cattle-droving in north-eastern Brazil to Recife to São Paulo in a search for work. One is favorably reminded of "The Grapes of Wrath" during the first three-quarters of this trek.The faces of his principals—dour, tired and drained of emotion—resemble lost souls as they trudge along country roads, dig for crabs in the mud near Recife and finally take up the offer of a truck owner recruiting labor for construction work in São Paulo.Vaguely one is made aware that Mr. Amico is incensed at inequality. Volkswagen workers get $350 a month in Germany and only $80 in Brazil, his bulletins shout. The truck speeds from Recife to São Paulo along a road banked by signs extolling American gas, cars, tires and banks as well as Krupp and its products. The newspaper headlines report on Stokely Carmichael, the war in Vietnam and Detroit riots. The bulletins and narration, translated facilely from the Portuguese and Italian into English subtitles, also speak of the dearth of doctors and other facilities as well as of work.When the couple, played convincingly by Joel Barcelos and Janira Santiago, arrive in a São Paulo teeming with cars, with crowds that show the melting pot of races and colors, with tall buildings, nightclubs and fashion shows, Mr. Amico's point is not really made. The signs of wealth are there—the man is put to work on the Sao Paulo Hilton, his family is ensconced in a shantytown cubicle — but nothing is proved by the writer-director's interspersed propaganda except that it is obvious, shallow and largely ineffective.In taking his inarticulate family on a bleak, forbidding trek to seek substance and roots, the director often reminds us artistically and poignantly of our own migrant farm laborers. But Brazil's and the world's poor are served badly, if at all, by his quick, amateurish, surface implications of the powers behind all the inequality.






















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































