MEDFORD, Mass., May 31 (AP)—The 1,500 Tufts Univer sity students who boycotted the official university com mencement yesterday attended their own ceremonies today. The rites departed radically from traditional exercises. 
BOSTON, May 31 (AP)—Prof. Paul A. Samuelson of the Mas sachusetts Institute of Tech nology tonight called “that war in Indochina” the “single great est specter hanging over the economy.” The “greatest single blessing that could affect the pocketbook of the American public would be for us to get right out of Southeast Asia and cut our losses,” the economist said in a local television broad cast. 
NEW CONCORD, Ohio, May 31 (UPI) — President Nixon made small talk about football and surfing to put college pro testers at ease in a confronta tion at the Lincoln Memorial May 9, but he really wanted to help them to understand the “lessons of history,” Ronald L. Ziegler, White House press sec retary, said today. 
CHICAGO—The postman, as he usually does, rang for the third time the other day at Paul Harvey's trim, native‐stone house in the exclusive Chicago suburb of River Forest. He was bringing the day's third large bag of mail—most of it letters from applauding listeners of the man who is called, and on occasion calls himself, the “voice of the silent majority.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 31—Several hundred Buddhist monks and nuns of the militant An Quang faction began a 48‐ hour hunger strike today. 
POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y., May 31 — Peace symbols crowned a sea of mortar boards and a Pomeranian scampered among the audi ence with a red protest band tied to his rear left leg. But Vassar graduated its seniors today (as did Smith and Mount Holyoke) in the well bred, tranquil style that has always been expected of the elite women's colleges.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 31—About 75 Vietcong and North Vietnamese soldiers, who seized part of the resort city of Dalat yesterday, slipped past hundreds of encircling Govern ment troops today and escaped into the surrounding hills. 
One man was wounded and three suspects were being held by the police after a running gun battle yesterday afternoon between the occupants of two cars in the Bath Beach section of Brooklyn. 
STOCKHOLM, May 30 — Premier Olof Palme of Sweden will begin a nine‐day visit to the United States on Wednes day, and he sees his trip as an opportunity to explain “the ideas and interests this small country stands for.” 
A Brooklyn Democratic lead er telephoned his Congressman last month and set in motion the events that brought Pvt. Joseph C. Caruso halfway around the world, from a line company in Vietnam to his ail ing mother in Red Hook.
CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., May 31—On the afternoon of May 6, a Wednesday, Dr. Edgar F. Shannon Jr., president of the University of Virginia, was pelted with mashmallows and that night students threatened to break into his home. 
Robert W. Haack, president of the New York Stock Ex change, said yesterday: “The Vietnam war is the single most important factor as far as the stock market is concerned.” 
WASHINGTON, May 31 (AP) — Representative Henry S. Reuss, Democrat of Wis consin, said today he was Introducing legislation to con tinue the 5 per cent surtax on corporations until the end of the war in Southeast Asia. Mr. Reuss said extension of the surcharge, now scheduled to expire July I, would bring in $2‐billion a year—enough to offset deficits projected by the Administration. 
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., May 31—President Nixon received briefing from his leading ad visers and commanders today on the operations in Cambodia and the war in Vietnam and was reportedly “encouraged” by what he heard. 
HARTFORD, June 1—Donald J. Irwin, a Norwalk lawyer who served three terms in the House of Representatives, to day became the fifth candidate for the Democratic nomination for United States Senator from Connecticut. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 1—Eight more newsmen were reported missing in Cambodia today and were believed cap tured by North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops. 
WASHINGTON, June 1 — State Department officials said today that South Vietnamese military authorities had been asked to assist in the search for the missing newsmen. 
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., June 1—The White House hinted to day that the United States might not provide tactical air support to South Vietnamese forces in Cambodia after June 30, the deadline for the with drawal of American troops from Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, June 1—The House Appropriations Commit tee, citing domestic budgetary problems, voted today for a $555‐million cut in the Adminis tration's foreign aid program. 
WHITE PLAINS, June 1—A State Supreme Court justice Chas ruled that the American flag may not be flown at half staff to express “an idea which in its origins and in its totally involves an expression of a political concept.” 
TAYNINH, South Vietnam, May 29 — Twenty‐year‐old Conrad Graff, a warrant offi cer who is the pilot of a medical ‐ evacuation helicop ter that carries the wounded in South Vietnam and Cam bodia, keeps looking at his passengers. 
CHICAGO, June 1 (AP) — Nine members of the Students for a Democratic Society pleaded guilty today to charges of aggravated battery and mob action stemming from a demon stration last September protest ing the start of the Conspiracy 7 trial. 
Federal Budget Director Robert P. Mayo came to Wall Street yesterday to reassure the investment community that the Nixon Administration was con fident of a business upturn in the second half of 1970. 
WASHINGTON, June 1 (AP) — President Nixon has reas sured a 10‐year‐old Maryland boy that the youth's brother, soldier killed in Vietnam, is in heaven. 
The President of the United States can rightly call upon the television networks whenever he wishes to speak about the Vietnam war or any other major mat ter. Tomorrow evening he will make an interim report on the Cambodian operation; another one is promised at the end of the month when all American troops are scheduled to have returned to South Vietnam. 
An 18‐year trustee of New York University submitted his resignation yesterday to pro test what he described as the university's “political activist role” in connection with recent protests against United States military involvement in South east Asia. 
DETROIT, June 1—Lenore Romney, a candidate for the Republican nomination for the United States Senate from Michigan and wife of George Romney. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, called today for the withdraw al of all American troops from Vietnam next year. 
Mac Foster served two tours of combat duty in Vietnam with the Marines. In one of 14 battles, the 27‐year‐old ser geant knocked out a 50‐caliber machine gun with a grenade. He has been recommended for the Silver Star, as a result of that action near Chu Lai. 
WASHINGTON, June 1—The Republican National Chairman, Representative Rogers C. B. Morton, said today that United States involvement in the Viet nam war no longer served the national interest, and he pre dicted that the Cambodian foray would help make it pos sibe to “get the hell out of there.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 1—President Nguyen Van Thieu was reliably reported today to be moving swiftly to block Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky from making political capital out of his active role in South Vietnamese military operations in Cambodia. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 1 (AP) — United States troops found today an under ground hospital in a North Viet namese base complex in Cam bodia that already had yielded tons of enemy munitions and supplies.
WASHINGTON, June 2 (UPI) — Members of the Senate — Republicans and Democrats, hawks and doves—ralied today around Senator Mark O. Hat field, Republican of Oregon, in a rare display of unity. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 2 (AP) — Accounts of peasants in the area where group of television reporters disappeared Sunday raised a question today whether the men had been ambushed. 
ROCHESTER, N. Y.—When the four students were killed by National Guardsmen at Kent State University on May 4, nearly 1,000 of the University of Rochester's 3,300 undergraduates met in a dining hall to seek a way to vent their anger and frus tration. 
WASHINGTON, June 2—A high Treasury official told Congress today that in his per sonal opinion the time had come to “give serious consideration” to some form of voluntary restraint on wages and prices. 
WASHINGTON, June 2 (UPI) —Antiwar Representatives said today they would try to amend a proposed debt ceiling increase in order to cure United States involvement in Southeast Asia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam (AP), June 2—The United States command has completed an in vestigation into charges of looting lodged against American troops who captured the Cam bodian town of Snoul last month. Any disciplinary action that may be taken will be car ried out by the units involved, a spokesman said today 
WASHINGTON, June 2 — The Federal Communications Commission challenged Con gress today to broaden its drives for cut‐rate political ad vertising on television and for modification of the “equal time” rule that now frustrates campaign debates. 
OAKLAND, Calif., June 2 —Above the coffee shop in the shiny new Oakland In ternational Airport is a row of 24 clocks telling the time at 24 points around the globe, including the Azores, Dakar and Bombay. 
WASHINGTON, June 2— The State Department said to day that the United States would provide arms and equip ment to ethnic Cambodians liv ing in Thailand who go to Cam bodia for military duty. 
Howard J. Samuels outlined yesterday a program for party political reform that he said he would work for if elected Governor. 
BINGHAMTON, N.Y., June 21 —Arthur J. Goldberg began a three‐day upstate campaign to day in his quest for the Demo cratic nomination for Governor by chiding Governor Rockefel ler for “unsound and unfair budget practices” and by pledging to consolidate or abol ish state agencies grown “fat” with patronage. 
WASHINGTON, June 2—The capital is full of university students these days, lobbying the Congress for peace in Southeast Asia. Potentially, they are a powerful new politi cal force in the nation—there are 7 million college students and half the population of the country is under age 25—but they are inexperienced and disorganized and sorely in need of leadership. 
June 2. 1970
SACRAMENTO, Calif., June 2 — Assemblyman Jess Unruh was nominated by California Democrats tonight to run against Gov. Ronald Reagan, who was unopposed for the Re publican nomination. 
MIDLAND, Mich., June 2 (AP)—Five members of a group calling itself “Beaver 55” en tered pleas of guilty today to charges of conspiracy to will fully and maliciously damage property of the Dow Chemical Company. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 1 — There is widespread doubt among the most experi enced American observers in South Vietnam that current United States policies will bring lasting peace. Although 110,000 American troops, have been withdrawn from Viet nam and enormous strides have been made in pacification in the last 18 months, the United States still faces vast problems in extricating itself.
President Andrew W. Cordier of Columbia University evoked applause from an outdoor com mencement audience of 8,000 persons on the campus yester day when he declared that the Indochina war's 44.000 Ameri can dead, 300,000 wounded and $100‐billion cost “cannot be justified” either by its char acter or “any conceivable re sult.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 2 (AP) —North Vietna mese sappers overran part of a Government fire base in the far northern part of South Vietnam today but were beat en back after inflicting heavy casualties on the South Viet namese defenders. 
Foreign policy issues occu pied the four candidates for the Democratic nomination for Sen ator from New York yester day. 
WASHINGTON, June 2, (AP)—The antiwar move ment has reached the United States military officers corps. 
MOSCOW—President Nixon correctly estimated the advance military and diplomatic impli cations of his decision to order U. S. troops into Cambodia to clean out Vietnamese Commu nist sanctuaries and, as dis cussed in a previous column, enormous booty was seized while Russia and China dis played prudence in their initial reactions. However, where Nix on made a grievous miscalcula tion was in judging repercus sions at home. 
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's televised address to the nation last night on the war in Indo china, as recorded by The New York Times:
WEST POINT, N. Y., June 3 — Vice President Agnew praised the leadership qualities of graduates of the United States Military Academy today while attacking what he termed “criminal misfits” and “charla tans of peace” who cause na tional confusion. 
MONTGOMERY, Ala., June 3 —If President Nixon's handling of the economy, student unrest and Indochina has moved the electorate to the left, as some politicians believe it has, you couldn't prove it by the results of yesterday's primary elec tions. It was not a good day for liberals or for doves. InAlabama, George C. Wallace showed that race is still the dominant fac tor in his state's politics, 105 years after the last Union soldier fired the last shot. But the ef ficacy of appeals to racial fears is not what it once was, even in Alabama. Only 51 of every 100 Alabamans who voted “stood up for George,” and most of the well‐educated whites and nearly all the blacks were among those who sat down.
In this soft time of the year, when members of the city's university clubs are wont to loll in their leather armchairs savoring sweet summer memories of long gone commencements and class days, many are finding this June that—even in their thoughts—they can not go home again. 
KNOXVILLE, Tenn., June 3 — Forty‐seven warrants have been issued in connection with, the heckling of President Nixon at a rally by the Rev. Billy Graham in the University of Tennessee Stadium last Thurs day night. 
WASHINGTON, June 3 — President Nixon said tonight that the allied drive into Cam bodia was “the most successful operation of this long and dif ficult war” and that he was now able to resume his with drawal of American troops from South Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 3—At least a dozen times in the last month when his troops were stalled on Cambodian battlefields, Lieut. Gen. Do Cao Tri has swooped down to them in his helicopter, strode to the front of their ranks and assumed temporary com‐ mand to get them moving. Once, in his impatience, he scrambled atop an armored car and, jabbing his swagger stick toward Viet cong sniper positions in a Cambodian farmhouse, shout ed an order to charge, giving it all the authority he could muster in his compact 5‐foot 4‐inch, 140‐pound frame.
United States Senator Harri son A. Williams Jr., who won a decisive victory in Tuesday's Democratic Senate primary election in New Jersey, showed every indication yesterday of unifying badly split Democrats in the state for the first time since 1965. 
The Dow Chemical Company does not make napalm any more, but the company has had so much experience in deal, ing with the uproar it caused that Carl A. Gerstacker, Dow's chairman, came up with an in dustry primer yesterday on how other companies might handle similar confrontations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 3 (AP)—A fresh South Vietnamese force reached a mountain outpost in the north west corner of the country today and relieved a garrison hard hit by two days of heavy fighting. Field reports said enemy pressure on the post was easing. 
WASHINGTON, June 3 (AP) —A special White House mis sion left today on an inspec tion tour of Vietnam and Cam bodia. The group was heavily weighted with Governors and Congressmen who support President Nixon's policy in In dochina but included one dis senting Senator, Thomas J. McIntyre. 
SAN FRANCISCO, June 3— Ronald Reagan and Jess Unruh were attacking each other to day even before the votes were all counted in the primary elec tions that made them rivals in November for the governorship of California. 
WASHINGTON, June 3—In a key test of strength on the Indochina‐war issue, a biparti san coalition in the Senate demonstrated today that the coalition commands a clear majority supporting legislative restrictions on future military activities in Cambodia. 
For the first time, one of the candidates in the campaign for the Democratic nomination for Senator from New York at tacked the other three yester day. 
Forty‐three American win ners of Nobel prizes in science have subscribed to a letter calling on President Nixon to “rise to the heroism that these times demand” through a swift end to United States participa tion in the war in Southeast Asia. 
Two crews of South Viet namese sailors took com mand here yesterday of two former United States Navy ships in a transfer ceremony described by an American admiral as an example of Vietnamization of the war in Southeast Asia. 
An address to the American Association of Museums con vention yesterday brought Gov ernor Rockefeller a standing ovation — and a confrontation afterwards by a group of dis sident artists. 
WASHINGTON, June 3 — Protests within the Peace Corps against the expanded fighting in Southeast Asia have been brought home to Joseph H. Blatchford, the director, in antiwar petitions signed by a few hundred members on two continents. 
The American Civil Liberties Union has adopted a resolution to work for the “immediate termination” of the war in Southeast Asia in what was termed a “major departure” from the organization's tradi tional role as a defender of in dividual rights. 
KIAMESHA LAKE, N. Y., June 3—Governor Rockefeller called the revenue‐sharing plan passed by the 1970 Legislature the “single greatest fiscal advance” in the history of rela tions between the state and local government. 
WASHINGTON, June 3—The unprecedented “success” that President Nixon proclaimed to night for the American military venture into Cambodia is not subject to statistical proof or challenge. For his calculations dealt essentially not with what has happened but with what will result in the future: fewer casualties for American troops, more training time for South Vietnam ese troops and firmer understand ing of Mr. Nixon's resolve in the mind of the enemy.
COLUMBUS, Ohio, June 3 (UPI) — A hearing was post poned today until June 11 in a suit by the American Civil Lib erties Union charging Adjutant General S. T. Del Corso of Ohio with using state funds to coerce National Guardsmen into sup‐ porting the Indochina war. The suit also said that General Del Corso, commander of the Ohio National Guard, used state per sonnel to get the guardsmen to line up behind President Nixon and his policy in Vietnam.
Regular Commentators and Guests Divided the reaction of television commentators and invited studio guests to President Nixon's speech Wednesday evening on the Indochina war ranged from succinct skepti cism, sharp criticism and a degree of support to a broad conclusion that not much news had come from the White House. 
PARIS, June 4—The Viet namese Communist delegates, speaking at today's session of the Vietnam peace talks, de nounced President Nixon's address last night on Cambo dia and expressed satisfaction at the opposition in the United States to his Asian policies. 
TAYNINH, South Vietnam, May 30—Nguyen Thi Khao is 41 years old and the American soldiers that she works for are the age of her oldest children. 
MERIDEN, Conn., June 4 (AP)—An Air Force recruiting sergeant who described the Air Force as “virtually noncombat ant” and called Army draftees cannon fodder has been re lieved of his duties here.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 4—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam, wel comed like a visiting potentate, arrived today for a conference with the new Cambodian lead ers to resolve the delicate ques tion of Saigon's military role in this embattled country. 
WASHINGTON, June 4 (AP) —President Nixon today told a group of 119 high school seniors, chosen by a commis sion as 1970 Presidential Scholars, that despite “fears turmoil and uncertainty,” this was a fortunate time to be alive.
VERMILION, Ohio, June 4 (UPI)—An investigation began today after parents of a Viet nam war casualty learned that 114 letters mailed to their son in a military hospital were never delivered. 
WASHINGTON, June 4 — Eleven University of Minnesota professors told Vice President Agnew today that his public rhetoric was “driving moderates into the arms of extremists.”
WASHINGTON, June 4— Europe's youngest Premier, the intellectual and leftist Olof Palme of Sweden, today began a nine‐day visit aimed at per suading Americans that his country's opposition to the war in Vietnam did not mean it was hostile to the United States. 
WASHINGTON, June 4 — A life‐sized, chillingly realistic looking exhibit, designed to arouse public opinion in behalf of the release of American pris oners of war by the North Viet namese, was installed at the Capitol today with the backing of House Speaker John W. McCormack. 
WASHINGTON, June 4— President Nixon made Cam bodia sound so good on the TV the other night that it almost seems a pity to leave the place. “All our military objectives have been achieved,” he said, and the whole adventure was “the most successful operation of this long and difficult war.” 
A committee seeking an amendment to the New York City Charter to provide a legal test of the constitutionality of the war in Indochina opened a campaign headquarters yester day at 650 Fifth Avenue, at 52d Street. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 4 (Reuters)—The Mayor of Dalat, the Central Highlands resort city that was infiltrated by Vietcong guerrillas last weekend, will be replaced, the official South Vietnamese press agency reported today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 4 — Communist troops seized a village called Sethbo today and then lost it to a Cam bodian counterattack in a bat tle only 10 miles southeast of Pnompenh, officers in the field reported. It was the closest major fighting to the Cam bodian capital so far. 
WASHINGTON, June 4—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird disclosed tonight that President Nixon's senior military advisers would meet at a site in the Pacific forwhat he called a “major re deployment conference” short ly after the last American troops are withdrawn from Cambodia on June 30. 
BUFFALO, June 4—Federal, state and local authorities are investigating reports that Buf falo policemen fired shotgun pellets, wounding students on the campus of the State Univer sity here, during a disturbance last month. 
WASHINGTON, June 4 (UPI) —The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Co lumbia temporarily blocked a Senate subcommittee today from subpoenaing records of an antiwar organization that oper ates coffeehouses and publishes underground newspapers near military bases. 
For the second time in two days, a major corporate execu tive has hit out against the country's involvement in Viet nam and its effect on the econ omy. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 4 (AP)—A 13‐man fact finding party of members of Congress and officials arrived today. One of them said they intended to “look at the bunk ers” uncovered by allied forces inside Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 5—The potentially explo sive issue of how to resolve the fate of the Vietnamese minority of 400.000 in Cambo dia is the most difficult prob lem on the agenda of Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky's current visit to Pnompenh. 
OCEANSIDE, L. L, June 5 (AP)—Graduating students at Oceanside High School voted today against having any speaker at commencement ex ercises, following a controversy over their choice of an anti Vietnam war Congressman. 
Theodore C. Sorensen, they Democratic State Committee's designated candidate for United States Senator, said yesterday that he was not sure that or ganization support would help him in the June 23 primary. 
Twenty artists of the 44 se lected so far to show in the American Pavilion at this year's Venice Biennale have with drawn their work “as an act of dissociation from United States Government sponsorship,” ac cording to the Emergency Cul tural Government Committee of the New York Art Strike. 
Unwanted Power
WASHINGTON, June 5— President Nixon today urged officials in Knoxville, Tenn., to postpone legal action against professors and students who heckled him last week at a rally conducted by the Rev. Billy Graham on the campus of the University of Tennesse. 
WASHINGTON, June 5— President Nixon's personal in tervention appeared today to have buoyed hopes of Senators seeking to block an amendment that would curb the President's authority to mount future Unit ed States military operations in Cambodia. 
Representative Richard L. Ottinger visited the Metropoli tan Transportation Authority yesterday and delivered a re port an alleged safety defects in the city subways. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, June 5 (UPI)—A high official said to day that Thailand had put her forces on full alert along the border with Cambodia after North Vietnamese and Vietcong units were sighted north of Tonle Sap, the great lake of Cambodia. 
AMHERST, Mass., June 5— The graduating seniors of Am herst College heard I. F. Stone, the Washington journalist who has espoused various radical causes, applaud their genera tion and attack the American military establishment today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 5 (UPI)—A White House dele gation, including Governors and members of Congress, spent to day in closed military and eco nomic briefings before going to the Mekong Delta and Cam bodian border regions to see the Vietnam war first hand. 
PARIS, June 5—France and the Soviet Union joined today in deploring “the foreign inter vention that is widening and prolonging the conflict” in In dochina. 
LONDON, June 5—Ironists who write our history will take much pleasure in the Cambo dian adventure. For in the end it seems likely to confound both the claims of its author, President Nixon, and some of the fears of its critics. 
MOSCOW, June 5—The So viet Union warned the Indo chinese Communists today that they would be courting “defeat and destruction” if they let their actions be dictated by Communist China. 
Three antiwar protesters charged with disrupting serv ices at Temple Emanuel‐El were ordered to trial yesterday despite the synagogue's request that the charges be dropped. 
SVAY ROLOM, Cambodia, June 5—Two Cambodian battalions, poorly equipped but with high morale, are. trying to dislodge a well‐armed force of North Vietnamese and Vietcong only 11 miles south east of Pnompenh.
WASHINGTON, June 5—Pre mier Olof Palme said today that Sweden would continue to try to help American prisoners of war in Southeast Asia. 
The Columbia Broadcasting system issued an announce ment yesterday confirming the death of its correspondent, George Syvertsen, in Cambodia. 
College commencements, tra ditionally as predictable in style and form as in oratory, have been substantially changed at many schools in the metropol itan area this year to reflect concern over the war in Viet nam, campus strife and racial injustice. 
TOKYO, June 6 (AP)—An estimated total of 2,300 demonstrators paraded through Tokyo streets today, carrying antiwar placards and shouting for peace in Indochina, the police said. The demonstration was orderly. 
WASHINGTON, June 6—The Senate Foreign Relations Com mittee issued today a staff re port challenging the military reason given by President Nix on for ordering the Cambodian intervention and suggesting that the military gains claimed by the Administration were out weighed by the risks of a broadened war in Indochina. 
WASHINGTON, June 6 (AP) —Vice President Agnew an nounced today that the Nixon Administration would seek an additional $50‐million for ex pansion of job opportunity pro grams for young people this summer. 
WASHINGTON — It was after midnight in the dispirited headquarters of Gov. Albert P. Brewer in an old hotel in Montgomery, Ala., and one of the workers was trying to ex plain things to a visiting Yankee. “When you boil it down,” he said, “it was the rednecks versus the niggers and the Jay cees. Even in 1970, there are still more of them than us.”
WASHINGTON, June 6—The United States is known to fa vor a long‐range pacification program in Cambodia and the, urgent training of Cambodiani troops by South Vietnamese and Thai advisers to prevent a Communist take‐over of the country.
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. — When Interstate 95 is completed from Houlton, Me., on the border of New Brunswick (Canada), to Mi ami, it will be possible to drive this entire distance of 1,866 miles in 31 hours 6 minutes without exceeding 60 miles an hour. Such are the calculations of the Transportation Department of the Federal Highway Administration.
SAN FRANCISCO, June 6—A campaign that may become a classic in this state's political history opened Tuesday night as soon as it was certain that Jess Unruh had easily defeated Samuel W. Yorty, the Mayor of Los Angeles, in the Demo cratic primary for the nomina tion to oppose Gov. Ronald Reagan. 
Nelson G. Gross, Republican candidate for the United States Senate from New Jersey, met with four international and government officials in Saigon yesterday, his second stop on a 13‐day tour of some major world trouble spots. 
GAMBIER, Ohio, June 6 (AP) — Premier Olof Paime of Sweden refused to he shouted down by demonstrating long shoremen today during a speech at Kenyon College. 
WASHINGTON — After three weeks of perhaps historic but slow‐moving debate, the Senate last week got around to the first crucial vote on the Cambodian issue. The test of strength went against the Nixon Administra on and indicated that a majori ty in the Senate was determined to impose legislative limitations on future military activities in Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, June 6 (AP) —Two members of the first known antiwar organization op erating at the officer level have been removed from their intel ligence jobs in the office of the Chief of Naval Operations. 
WASHINGTON, June 6—The Defense Department is moving cautiously to reduce the size of the armed services, but Pen tagon planners doubt that the force can be cut to 2.5 million men—the pre‐Vietnam level— in the immediate future. 
NEAK LUONG, Cambodia, June 2—As the United States landing craft Showboat 89 unloaded food, ammunition and other supplies at this Mekong river town in Cam bodia today, shopkeepers and free agents on a once sleepy street just above the landing area were doing a brisk busi ness in items from the Show boat's earlier deliveries. 
SAIGON—The war in South Vietnam has always been a se ries of regional and local affairs, but it has become even more fractionalized since the allies en tered. Cambodia. Last week it looked more like a dozen wars than a single struggle. 
PRINCETON, N. J., June 6— President Nixon has registered steady gains in popularity over the last two months, according to the Gallup Poll. 
Threat to Survival
LOS ANGELES, June 6 (UPI) — The Los Angeles Times, which in the past has support ed President Nixon's Vietnami zation program, called on him in an editorial prepared for to morrow's editions to withdraw all American forces from Viet nam in 18 months at the latest. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 6—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam said today that his country had no terri torial ambitions in Cambodia and that Saigon would send military forces to help Cam bodia whenever and wherever Pnompenh asked. 
PINELAWN, L. I., June 6— The mother of a young soldier who died In Vietnam last year was joined by more than 100 other mothers in a simple cere mony yesterday before a small white headstone at the national cemetery here to commemo rate her son's 20th birthday. 
Ramsey Clark, the former United States Attorney General, said last night that any abridge ment of basic civil rights as a countermeasure to social un rest could prove to be a greater daneer than the unrest itself. 
Associate Justice Byron R. White of the Supreme Court signed an order yesterday pre venting a New York soldier from being shipped out of the country until further action by the United States Solicitor Gen eral could be taken in the case. 
All of this was deliberate. The Nixon Administration took pains to explain, art fully to be sure, that Swe den's boyish‐looking, intel lectual, leftist leader was the man nobody—well, almost nobody—had invited to din ner. The Administration's reasons for this attitude were unstated, but not hard to divine: Sweden has recog nized the Hanoi Government, taken in American deserters, promised North Vietnam $40‐million in aid and been the setting for eggs, epithets and demonstrations aimed at American Ambassador Jerome H. Holland.
BABYLON, L. I., June 6— Senator Charles Goodell told a peace rally today in this gen erally conservative South Shore community that “it is wrong to wave the Vietcong flag but it is also wrong to wave the American flag to cov er our sins.” 
KOMPONG TRACH, Cam bodia, June 6 — President Nixon's 11‐man fact‐finding mission of Senators, Represen tatives and Governors heard an urgent appeal for arms today from a Cambodian field com mander in this southern town near the South Vietnamese border.
WASHINGTON, June 7—Sen ate testimony disclosed today that under the secret agreement entered into in 1967, the Unit ed States has been paying Thai land $50‐million a year for sending a combat division to South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, June 7—Fol lowing are the votes of delega tions from New York, New Jer sey and Connecticut on the major roll‐calls in Congress during the week ended yester day: 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 7—The firing last night here that resulted in an alert for one hour has turned out to be a personal fight between two units of the Cambodian armed forces. 
CANBERRA, Australia, June 7 (UPI)—American and South Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia has been “remark ably successful,” William Mc Mahon, Australian Minister for External Affairs, said today. He said it had bought time for the Cambodian Government to make diplomatic moves to keep the country independent and neutral. 
FIRE SUPPORT BASE SHAKEY, Cambodia, June 7 —The men of Company A, Fifth Battalion of the 60th In fantry, who are manning this muddy base high on a moun taintop northeast of the Fish hook, wore their hair short and had their faces shaven clean today. Some got new fatigues to replace those that they were wearing 38 days ago when they left the Mekong Delta to go on what they were told would be a three‐day mission. 
MILTON, Wis., June 7 (UPI) —Senator William Proxmire, a frequent critic of President Nixon's war and economic policies, today called Mr. Nixon “a decent and intelli gent man” and denounced personal attacks against him. 
With most of the political at tention focused on the Demo cratic statewide primary, the traditional line between Demo crats and Republicans has be come blurred in a number of other races — particularly Con gressional contests. 
Representative Richard Max McCarthy, one of the candi dates for the Democratic nom ination for Senator, criticized two of his opponents yester day, charging one with exces sive campaign spending and another with gimmickry. 
ST. LOUIS, June 7 (AP)— Flag‐waving workers marched more than three miles through St. Louis today to demonstrate support for the Nixon Adminis tration's Southeast Asia poli cies. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 7—While President Nikon's delegation of Governors, Sen ators and Representatives was being shown the former Com munist sanctuaries in eastern Cambodia, cleaned out in the recent allied drive, not too far away, teen‐age Cambodian soldiers were dying because they did not have enough arms and ammunition. “The American and South Vietnamese invasion may have helped Vietnam,” said one in formed military source here last week, “but it hasn't saved Cambodia.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 7 (UPI)—The world's atlas compilers got another terminology headache today. 
DENVER, June 7 — Three Vietnam veterans, active for several months in war protests in the Colorado Springs area, say they have formed an un derground G.I. news service to report on “the Army's many illegal activities.” 
Despite nearly a decade of costly United States involve ment with Vietnam and her people, American scholarly expertise on Vietnam, par ticularly North Vietnam, is almost nonexistent.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, June 8—Fighting continued today around the provincial capital of Siemreap in Cambodia. Informants said that if the city should fall, the North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops would have a major psychological victory because Siemreap is just six miles south of the historic ruins of Angkor Wat. 
LONDON, Monday, June 8 (Reuters)—An American soldier on leave from West Germany said ata rally against the war in Vietnam here last night that the stupidity of an officer had cost the lives of 28 of American servicemen in South Vietnam.
WILLIAMSTOWN, Mass., June 7—Mayor Lindsay called today for “a new center” in national politics that rejects the polari zation and bitterness of the ex treme right and the far left. 
WASHINGTON, June 7— Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that the United States would announce “fairly soon” its decision on the sale of jet warplanes to Israel, but he strongly hinted that it would be only partly favorable. 
The two candidates in the Democratic primary in the 17th Congressional District in Man hattan differed sharply yester day on the issue of American troop withdrawals from South east Asia.
HONG KONG, June 8 (Reu ters)—Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam has reported slow economic progress and called for efforts to meet in creasing demands arising from the Indochina war. 
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., June 8 (UPI) — The Army is reported planning to drop all charges tomorrow against one of four officers charged in the alleged Mylai massacre.
SAIGON, Shuth Vietnam, June 8 (AP)—Two members of President Nixon's 13‐man fact finding team flew to Pnomperrh early today for a meeting with Premier Lon Nol of Cambodia. 
The National Droadoasting Company quoted a Cam bodian Army spokesman yes terday as having said that a television correspondent and four cameramen had been taken to a “safe mountain hide‐out” by the Vietcong.
CHICAGO, June 8 (UPI)— United States marshals and the police tussled today with shout ing supporters of Bobby Seale in the lobby of the Federal Building after members of the Chicago Seven had exhorted demonstrators to free the Black Panther national chairman “by any means necessary.”
A list of 44 artists whose prints have been chosen for ex hibition in the United States Pavilion at the Venice Biennale was released for the first time yesterday by officials of the Smithsonian Institution's Inter national Art Program, which sponsors participation in art programs abroad. 
An Army psychiatrist ob tained an order yesterday from Federal Judge John F. X. Mc Gohey for a hearing today at 10 A. M. at the United States Court House at Foley Square to seek the blocking of his assignment to Vietnam. 
In an article with the provocative title quoted above, the Soviet weekly New Times has spelled out Mos cow's deep disquiet at Communist China's recent polit ical gains in Southeast Asia. New Times indicts Peking as partly responsible for Sihanouk's fall from power in Cambodia, and obliquely warns Hanoi that it runs the risk of “defeat and destruction” if it follows China's advice. 
TAYNINH, South Vietnam, June 8—United States military commanders and intelligence analysts estimate that allied forces have found only 30 per cent to 40 per cent of the enemy arms and supply stock piles in Cambodian sanctuaries. 
HONG KONG, June 8 — Communist China denounced the United States today for what it called aggressive acts against the North Koreans. 
SST Claims Disputed
WASHINGTON, June 8—The House of Representatives voted today to send a fact‐finding mission of its own to study “all aspects of United States mili tary involvement in Southeast Asia.” 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 8—Sporadic fighting continued today at Siemreap, near the historic ruins of Angkor Wat, after Government forces retook the Siemreap airfield, a Cam bodian spokesman reported. 
WASHINGTON, June 8— Top Defense Department of ficials have warned military budget planners that fore seeable pay increases over the next two years may re quire cuts of $6 ‐ billion or more in existing forces and programs to keep the next defense budget at or below the $71.8‐billion budget re quest currently before Con gress. 
WASHINGTON, June 8 (UPI) —United Press International re ported erroneously May 25 that the number of Army generals had increased by about 50 per cent during the Vietnam War. Actually, there were 491 Army generals in 1960 and 501 in 1965, compared with 513 at present.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 8 (UPI)—The size of the United States force in Vietnam has dropped to its lowest level in more than three years, ac cording to figures issued today by the United States command. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 8 — Social Welfare Min ister Tran Nguon Phieu said today that the Goyernment, after two weeks of controversy, had reversed its decision to halt the evacuation of ethnic Vietnamese from Cambodia. 
BAYONNE, N. J., June 8 —The Mayor of Bayonne has written to the President of the United States, and very respectfully has said: Enough 
Arthur J. Goldberg carried his campaign for the Demo cratic nomination for Governor yesterday to the financial cen ter of the country at Broad and Wall Streets to denounce Gov ernor Rockefeller for his sup port of Nixon Administration war and fiscal policy. 
Three local Democratic Rep resentatives yesterday broke with political custom to endorse a primary opponent of an in cumbent Democratic member of New York's House delega tion.
Paul O'Dwyer won a 30,000‐ member union's official endorse ment for the Democratic nom ination for United States Senator last night, despite a fervent appeal for support by Theodore C. Sorensen, one of his three rivals in the June 23 primary. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 8—American commanders have nearly doubled their esti mate of enemy strength in Cambodia and in the sector of South Vietnam immediately north of Saigon. The re‐evalu ation follows the reported dis covery of traces of some pre viously unknown and unex pectedly intricate Communist organization. 
The effort to curb the further spread of the Vietnam war into Cambodia and to reassert the constitutional authority of Congress in the war‐making process faces a second crucial test tomorrow when the Senate is scheduled to vote on a proposal by Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, to alter the proposed Cooper‐Church amendment to the Military Sales Act. 
Senator Charles E. Goodell told the graduating class of Finch College yesterday that American participation in the war in Indochina was “an aw ful mistake” from which we should withdraw. 
MOSCOW, June 9—Three American women wearing black pajama ‐ like suits and conical straw hats demonstrated today in front of the United States Embassy against the American military action in Southeast Asia. 
Governor Rockefeller gibed yesterday at the current oppo sition to the war in Vietnam by his would‐be Democratic rival, Arthur J. Goldberg, im plying it came late. He said he had himself “opposed” the war and offered a 1968 plan to end it. 
VIENTIANE, Laos. June 9— Premier Souvanna Phouma an nounced today the fall of the major southeast Laotian town of Saravane to Communist‐led Pathet Lao and North Vietnam ese troops.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 9 (Reuters) — Fighting in creased in the Fishhook region of Cambodia yesterday, a, United States military spokes man said today. Four American soldiers were reported killed and 36 wounded. Vietcong and North Vietnamese losses were not known, the spokesman said. 
PARK CITY, Utah, June 9— Voter resentments over the double crunch of inflation and rising unemployment may prove decisive in elections this fall, state political leaders said in interviews here today. 
Dr. George Wald, the anti war Nobel laureate, responded to a smattering of heckling from parents and students at the New York University com mencement yesterday by re citing the Pledge of Allegiance with emphasis. 
A Federal judge yesterday temporarily barred the assign ment to Vietnam of a 28‐year‐ old New York psychiatrist who contended he would be re quired to “commit war crimes on a massive scale.”
WASHINGTON, June 9—The Senate Democratic leader, Nike Mansfield of Montana, led an attack today against an Administration‐supported pro posal on Cambodia. He con tended that the effect of the Administration proposal would be to produce another Gulf of Tonkin resolution, giving the White House a blank check.
WASHINGTON, June 9— Nearly 200 Roman Catholic priests, nuns and seminarians called upon members of Con gress today to end the fighting in Southeast Asia, end repres sion of political dissent and act to restore confidence in the American form of government. 
Dr. Howard Zinn, a long‐time activist in the civil rights and peace movements, speaking yes terday at the 46th commence ment of Queens College, was heard with mixed feelings when he made a bitter attack on the war in Vietnam and the “para phernalia” and “rigamorole” of the democratic process in the United States. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 9 —Saigon's residents do not mourn the loss of the tall leafy trees that once made Saigon a city with charm, for there is too much else that is gone from their lives. 
The poetic feeling came to Steve Tannen five years ago, as a senior in high school. He had this close friend, who quit school, in junior high and joined the Marines. The friend had less than four months of active duty left in Vietnam, but never made it home. 
SAIGON. South Vietnam, June 9 (AP)—Thailand's Chief of Staff flew here from Bangkok today amid mounting specula lation that part of Thailand's 12,000‐man Black Panther Divi sion would be withdrawn from South Vietnam to fight in northwest Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, June 9—The Nixon Administration is drawing up plans to shift numerous American economic and social programs in South Vietnam and Laos from civilian to military control.
Cost of Campaigning
WASHINGTON, June 9 (UPI) —Members of a group of 11 Congressmen, governors and White House assistants who toured parts of South Vietnam and Cambodia at President Nixon's request reported to night they were enthusiastic over the military success of the United States intervention in Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, June 9—The Army dismissed today “for lack of evidence” all charges against an officer accused in the alleged massacre of civilians in the Songmy area of South Vietnam. 
PRINCETON, N. J., June 10 —Forty‐eight per cent of the American public is in favor of “freezing” prices and wages at their present level as long as the Vietnam war lasts, accord ing to the latest Gallup Poll. Forty‐one per cent are opposed and 11 per cent are undecided, the Gallup organization said to day. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 10—South Vietnamese and American military planners are expected to give the South Vietnamese Army a greatly expanded role in fighting the North Vietnamese main force in the next few months.
PARIS, June 10—A promi nent South Vietnamese neu tralist offered here today to form a government of “the silent majority,” with no ties to either side, to lead his coun try out of the war. 
WASHINGTON, June 10 — The doctors in the auditorium of the New Senate Office Build ing wore peace buttons and smoked their pipes reflectively. Senator Harold E. Hughes, in a bright blue suit, looked down on them and said happily:
A map showing how the Pacific “grew” has been pub lished by a team of American and Soviet scientists who took part last year in drilling into the floor of that ocean. 
Jerome A. Ambro, a white man running against a Negro for the Democratic nomination for Lieutenant Governor, said yesterday that it was “very dif ficult” for him to campaign be cause everything he says is in terpreted as racism or bigotry. 
WASHINGTON, June 10— Senior military planners here, surprised and elated by the per formance of South Vietnamese military units in Cambodia, say that it may bring about a shift in the strategy for conducting the war once most American soldiers leave Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 10 (AP) — President Ngu yen Van thieu signed a decree today establishing a permanent South Vietnamese Embassy in the Cambodian capital, Pnom penh, the Government radio re ported. 
SUNDSVALL, Sweden, June 10 (UPI)—Several hundred per sons cheered and applauded Ambassador Jerome Holland to day at the end of a four‐day Visit to this industrial city in northeastern Sweden. 
MOSCOW, June 10—Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin reported to day that the seven months of talks with Chinese Communist officials in Peking had failed to make any appreciable prog ress. 
FORT BRAGG, N. C., June 9—The newly reorganized John F. Kennedy Center for Military Assistance has just graduated its first class of new “ugly Americans”—39 officers who received a concerted six‐week smattering of knowledge in the Political and social sciences. 
WASHINGTON, June 10— Murray Chotiner emerged from seclusion as a White House ad viser for an hour this morning to provide some new insights into President Nixon, the un folding Republican campaign and, just incidentally, himself. 
Controlling Inflation
A group of union leaders promised strong support yes terday to Arthur J. Goldberg and hinted that other unions, now committed to Governor Rockefeller, might “soon have a change of heart.” 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 10—The Government here re ported today that Laotians had joined the North Vietnamese and Vietcong military forcesi forces that were fighting in the Siemreap area in northwest Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, June 10—Dr. James E. Allen Jr. of New York, who openly broke with the Nixon Administration over the Cambodian invasion, was oust ed today as the Government's too education official. 
WASHINGTON, June 10—On the eve of a crucial Senate vote on the Nixon Administration's Indochina policy, the White House received from a Presi dential commission an optimis tic report on the push into Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday. June 11 (AP)—A 74‐ year‐old Buddhist monk burned himself to death in Saigon early today to protest against alleged Government persecution and to appeal for peace in Vietnam. 
THE PRESIDENT
WASHINGTON, June 10—The official transcript of President Nixon's latest news conference quotes Mr. Nixon as having as serted that United States forces in Cambodia had captured “rockets by the thousands and small arms ammunition by the millions.” 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y.. June 11 —Secretary General Thant said today that only agreement between “the two biggest pow ers”—the United States and the Soviet Union— could end the rising level of war going on in the Middle East. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 11 — Vietcong guerrillas shot their way through a South Vietnamese hamlet early today, killing 70 civilians in their homes, a United States military spokesman said. 
The World Congress of Advertising ended yesterday on the subject of society's ills—its dominant theme for four days. 
PARIS, June 11—The Saigon Government announced today that it would release next month 62 disabled war prison ers and 24 fishermen captured at sea off North Vietnam. A spokesman for Hanoi indicated that his Government would raise no obstacle to the transfer. 
MOSCOW, June 11—The So viet Union announced today that it was increasing its mili tary and economic aid to North Vietnam as a result of intensi fied fighting in Indochina. 
Cambodian Evaluation
WASHINGTON, June 11 — Vice President Agnew appealed to Republican Congressional candidates tonight to campaign on the record of President Nixon. 
Arthur J. Goldberg, calling for sweeping legislative reform, accused Governor Rockefeller yesterday of a “cynical” abuse of executive power that he said had robbed the Legislature of its independence and creativ ity.
WASHINGTON, June 11—A former Army intelligence officer has written in a magazine arti cle that the American Army unit involved in the alleged Songmy massacre received conflicting intelligence information. 
The Senate took a reassuring step toward re asserting its constitutional checks over the war making powers of the President yesterday in rejecting an effort to transform the Cooper‐Church amendment into a virtual blank check for future military opera tions in Cambodia. 
Angkor, now in the hands of North Vietnamese forces, is generally regarded as the consummate masterpiece of the vanished Khmer Empire, which flourished from the 9th to the 13th century. 
WASHINGTON, June 11 — Dr. James E. Allen Jr., who was forced to resign yester day as the Government's chief education official, declared to day that the partisan con straints placed on him by the Nixon Administration had made it impossible for him to administer the Federal educa tion bureaucracy properly.
Premier Olaf Palme of Sweden said last night that he sensed “a kind of division in this na tion and an emotionally charged atmosphere” very unlike what he knew as a college boy in Ohio or when he had visited 36 states “by the hitchhiking method.” 
Two young men and a teen age boy described by the police as demonstrators protesting the war in Vietnam were arrested yesterday after entering the draft board at 201 Varick Street and reading the names of war dead from a list they had carried with them. The three were identified as William J. Dorfer Jr., 26 years old, of 430 Columbus Avenue, a clerk; Wil liam J. McGuire, 23, of Hilltop Road, Port Washington, L. I., a tutor, and Stephen Kurzyna, 16, of 2885 Briggs Avenue, the Bronx, a student.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 11—The allied intervention in Cambodia has resulted in a new wave of protests by South Viet namese against the Saigon Government. 
SYDNEY, Australia, June 11 —Five women chained them selves to the railings of the public gallery in the House of Representatives in Canberra today in protest against Aus tralia's conscription and in volvement in the Vietnam war. Policemen cut the five women free. The House Speaker, Sir William Aston, ordered that the women not be charged. 
WASHINGTON. June 11— A national conference intended to be of young people, by young people and for young people was announced today by the White House. 
WASHINGTON, June 11— In a rebuff to President Nixon, the Senate refused today to modify proposed legislative re strictions on future American military operations in Cam bodia. 
WASHINGTON, June 12— The Senate's debate on Indo china shifted today to the issue of whether the Administration should be permitted to finance the introduction of foreign troops into Cambodia. 
PHILADELPHIA, June 12 — The executive committee of President Nixon's Bicentennial Advisory Commission will prob ably revise the first draft of its recommendations for celebrat ing the country's 200th birthday in 1976, Dr. J. E. Wallace Ster ling the commission chairman, said in a telephone interview today. 
SST Benefits
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 12 — North. Vietnamese and Vietcong forces were reported to have launched two more at tacks today in their continuing campaign of harassing the Cam bodian Government. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 12—The enemy's slaying of civilians in a hamlet near Danang early yesterday is being pointed out by allied officials here as clear evidence of increasing Vietcong ter rorism aimed at thwarting Saigon's gains in the country side.
Members of a Congressional committee, including Repre sentative Richard Max Mc Carthy, toured the Bronx Vet erans Administration Hospital in Kingsbridge Road yesterday and were shocked by a statement by a paralyzed veteran of the war in Vietnam that a doctor had refused to give him braces so he could attempt to walk again. 
DETROIT, June 12 (UPI)— Senator Philip A. Hart, Demo crat of Chicago, announced today that he was running for a third term and repeated his appeal the nation “get out of Indochina” and turn its efforts to solving the problems at home.
MOSCOW, June 12—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communist party leader, accused the Nixon Administration today of talking about peace while carrying out “aggressive actions that aggra vate international tensions.” 
Moscow's three top leaders have underscored this week the chasm that separates the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union. Thus Com munist party chief Brezhnev has emphasized that Soviet‐American differences “are really deep”; Presi dent Podgorny characterized relations as “in a kind of frozen state,” and Premier Kosygin attacked this country as the “main source of international tension.” To these unfriendly words, Moscow has now added an announcement that it is sending additional aid to North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, June 12 — Employes of the Depart ment of Health, Education and Welfare want Elliot L. Richardson, when he becomes Secretary of the department, to convene with them the meet ing that the outgoing Secretary, Robert H. Finch, missed be cause of illness. 
AREAL ESTATE man attacking profit ‐grubbing and greed among his peers? One who says that some New York commercial buildings are put up just for the buck? Who is organizing a businessman's seminar to hear William Kunstler, Allen Ginsberg and a spokesman for homosexuals? Who has sunk $10,000 Into en Off‐Broadway play that offered nudity and a preachment against the Vietnam war? And who says, “Yes, I'm on the Left.” 
PARIS, June 13 — President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam predicted today that his forces would be engaged in a long war in Cambodia and that American troops would re main in his own country for “several years more.” 
MINNEAPOLIS, June 13— Hubert H. Humphrey announced his candidacy for the United States Senate today. 
WASHINGTON — The Biblical assurance that ye shall have the poor always with you has never ruffled Americans, who took it for granted that the Bible didn't mean right in your own neigh borhood. But recently the asser tion has been raised that the Constitution protects the rights of poor people to acquire living space in every community, and when the Supreme Court agreed last week to hear a case that could bolster this claim, the ac tion caused an uneasy stir. 
WASHINGTON, June 13 — The Justice Department asked the Supreme Court yesterday not to block the United States Army from sending to Vietnam a soldier who contends Newt York State law forbids the gov ernment to send New York, servicemen overseas to fight an unconstitutional war. 
WASHINGTON, June 13— After 16 months of giving mili tary leaders their head at the Pentagon, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird has reportedly decided to rein them in. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 13—The war is quieter when it rains. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 14—Enemy troops mounted fresh attacks on the key town of Kompong Speu, about 30 miles southwest of Pnompenh, the Cambodian cap ital, and lead elements fought their way into the center of the town, a Cambodian military communiqué said today. 
PARIS, June 13—The North Vietnamese spokesman at the Paris talks has denounced as “sheer hypocrisy” the proposal of U Thant, Secretary General of the United Nations, for an expanded international confer enc on the war in Iindochina. 
WASHINGTON—Several things seemed immediately apparent when Richard M. Nixon, in a swift Cabinet shuffle that caught most of the capital by surprise, moved Robert H. Finch and George P. Shultz into the White House and closer to his inner circle of advisers.
PRINCETON, N. J., June 13— With United States forces scheduled to be out of Cam bodia before the end of the month, the debate over the war will almost certainly center on the rate of withdrawal of troops from Vietnam. 
My Lai 4
WASHINGTON, June 13— The Nixon Administration is faced with what some of its high officials are privately de scribing as a perhaps impos sible task preventing a com munist takeover of Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON—The Senate's rejection, 52–47, of an attempt backed by President Nixon to water down the Church‐Cooper amendment assures Senate pas sage of that legislation, which would halt any form of Ameri can participation in the war in Cambodia after June 30. And that means one more step has been taken to restore some bal ance between Congressional au thority and that of the Com mander in Chief of the armed forces. 
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. June 13 —The first youth tried for heck ling President Nixon last month at a Billy Graham crusade serv ice here was freed this week because of a faulty search warrant. But arresting officers said later that they would take the case directly to the grand jury. 
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., June 13 —The Harvard College class of 1945, gathered here this week for its 25th re union, adopted by an over whelming margin a resolution condemning the war in Vietnam. 
The stockholdings of Repre sentative Richard L. Ottinger came under political attack yes terday as the four candidates for the Democratic nomination for Senator held their second televised debate in two days. 
WAVERLY, Minn., June 14— The nation's economy, not the war in Vietnam, will be the central issue in this fall's elec tion, former Vice President Hu bert H. Humphrey said today. 
Role in Southeast Asia
COLOMBO, Ceylon, June 14 (AP)—The two‐week‐old Gov ernment of Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike, in a sharp swing away from the West, an nounced today that it would recognize North Vietnam, North Korea, East Germany and the Vietcong's provisional revolu tionary government of South Vietnam. 
BOSTON, June 14—Two stu dents of public opinion have concluded that the young and the college‐educated have not opposed the war in Vietnam as much as popularly supposed. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 14 (UPI)—About 100 eld erly Buddhist women and youths carrying signs reading “Americans go home” joined funeral procession today for a 74‐year‐old monk who immolat ed himself in the cause of peace. The demonstration was peaceful. 
Compiled by Congressional Quarterly
A large group of executives, editor sand authors has ap pealed to the book publishing industry across the country to devote next Wednesday to “positive action for peace” by allowing employes to hold as semblies or lobby for political candidates opposed to the In dochina war. 
SAN DIEGO, Calif., June 14 (AP)—A Vietnam‐bound Navy destroyer has been sidelined for two months by what the Navy suspects was sabotage. Three sailors are being held. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 14—Cambodian and South Vietnamese troops fought un der cover of artillery barrages and fighter‐bomber attacks to day to regain control of the Cambodian city of Kompong Speu and keep open a vital link to the sea. 
WASHINGTON, June 14— The Nixon Administration is losing hope of getting Con gress to impose a tax on lead additives in gasoline. Pro 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 15—For the second time in three days, there was a de cidedly anti‐American flavor to the demonstrations staged to day by students protesting against the Thieu Government. 
About 500 people participated in a Battery Park ceremony yes terday observing the 193d an niversary of the adoption of the Stars and Stripes as the American flag. The spectators loudly applauded Thomas W. Gleason, president of the Inter national Longshoremen's Asso ciation, when he reiterated the continuing support of long shoremen for President Nixon's efforts to end the Vietnam war “with honor.” There were sev eral muted boos when it was announced that Mayor Lindsay had sent a telegram stating that he could not attend.
A national antiwar coalition of college educators announced yesterday the endorsement of 18 candidates for Congress and the initial contribution of $50, 000 to their primary campaigns. 
WASHINGTON, June 15— Senator Jacob K. Javits today broadened and perhaps ex tended the Senate's constitu tional debate by proposing that Congress limit by law the war making powers of the Presi dency. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 15—A task force of South Vietnamese and Cambodians failed in three attacks today to drive enemy troops out of Kompong Speu and to break blockade of vital supplies from Cambodia's sole deep ‐ water port. 
WASHINGTON, June 15 (AP) —The White House said today that no investigation was under way and no dossier being com piled on some 250 State De partment employes who signed a petition opposing Nixon Ad ministration policies in Cam bodia. 
WASHINGTON, June 15 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Indochina:
WASHINGTON, June 15 (AP) — Seventeen antiwar protesters were arrested today as they tried to celebrate a “mass for peace” inside the Pentagon. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 15 (UPI)— Cambodian military spokesmen said to day that the North Vietnam ese had set up a command post at the Temple of Lolei outside the Angkor complex of renowned temple ruins. The Vietnamese Communists were reported to have seized control of the area a few days ago. 
DETROIT, June 15 — Vice President Agnew said here to night that he would continue to speak out “forcefully, factual ly and fearlessly” and would not eliminate emotion from his public appeals. 
WASHINGTON, June 15 (AP) —The Pentagon made public to day a study by the Rand Cor poration speculating on the pos sible effects of a Vietcong take over in South Vietnam. The study found that reprisal kill ings could number at least 100,000 and said this figure could easily he higher. 
WASHINGTON, June 15 — Under pressure from the Demo cratic party, the American Broadcasting Company appears to have relaxed its rule against television advertising to solicit funds. 
GRAFENWOHR, West Ger many, June 15 (UPI)—Secre tary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that United States combat strength in Europe was increasing as it was reduced in Southeast Asia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 15—Authoritative South Vietnamese sources expressed impatience today with what they considered to be stalling by Thailand in rallying to the defense of Cambodia. 
Politics on the Air
MINNEAPOLIS, June 12—For two and a half years the Min neapolis Human Relations Com mission has been trying to handle complaints of police harassment of the city's black and Indian minorities and to punish those found guilty of it. 
NEW DELHI, June 15—Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's Con gress party has demanded the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Indochina “commencing with the Americans,” as a prel ude for a negotiated peace. 
JAKARTA, Indonesia, June 15 (Reuters) — Foreign Minister Adam Malik left today by air to head an Asian peace‐seeking mission in discussions about Cambodian with Soviet leaders. 
DOVER, Del., June 16 (UPI)— John Daniel lo, a Newcastle County councilman who ran on an anti‐war platform, won the Democratic nomination for Con gress today in Delaware's only statewide primary election. 
WASHINGTON, June 16 — The State Department has as sured Government officials who signed a letter last month to Secretary of State William P. Rogers protesting the incursion into Cambodia that no “formal or informal” punishment would he taken against them, the American Foreign Service Asso ciation said today. 
NEWTON, Mass, June 15— At the Massachusetts Demo cratic Convention last weekend a woman approached the Rev. Robert F. Drinan and told him she could not vote for him be cause he was a priest and be longed in a parish, not in pol itics. 
For Cease‐Fire
DANANG, South Vietnam, June 16 (Reuters)—A United States marine private pleaded innocent today to a charge of premeditated murder of 11 children and 5 women on Feb. 19 in a hamlet near this base city. 
WASHINGTON, June 16— Dean Rusk, the former Secre tary of State, tonight broke 18 months of silence on United States foreign policy to say that he could not “throw brick bats” at President Nixon for his failure to find peace in southeast Asia because the Ken nedy and‐Johnson Administra tions had also failed. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 16 (AP)—Three American cor respondents, captured May 7 by Communist troops in Cam bodia, arrived in Saigon today, apparently in good condition after being freed by their cap tors. 
KOMPONG SPEU, Cambodia, June 16—South Vietnamese and Cambodian infantry and armored units drove into this provincial capital and regional military headquarters today but found that the large enemy force they had hoped to trap had vanished.
WASHINGTON, June 16— North Vietnam has announced that it will “fight shoulder to shoulder with the fraternal peoples of Laos and Cam bodia.” The pledge is being viewed here as a commitment by Hanoi to merge the hostili ties in South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia into a single inte grated Indochin amilitary the ater. 
MOSCOW, June 16—Foreign Minister Adam Malik of Indo nesia and colleagues from Japan and Malaysia flew here today and Secretary General Thant arrives tomorrow on separate but similar missions: to per suade Moscow to use its good offices to get negotiations started to end the fighting now spreading through out Indochina. But despite the burst of diplomatic ac tivity, the mood in Moscow these days is not encouraging for an early end to the bloodshed. Soviet officials have been advising dip lomats that while they will be happy to talk with the Asian envoys, they will probably not have much in a positive way to tell them about negotiations. despite the burst of diplomatic ac tivity, the mood in Moscow these days is not encouraging for an early end to the bloodshed. Soviet officials have been advising dip lomats that while they will be happy to talk with the Asian envoys, they will probably not have much in a positive way to tell them about negotiations.
WASHINGTON, June 16—De fense Department sources re vealed today that there were “about 10,000” American troops still in Cambodia. The President has pledged that all United States troops will be out by June 30. 
Howard J. Samuels charged yesterday that Arthur J. Gold berg had “sug”ested” he was injecting racism into their campaign for the Democratic nomination for Governor. Mr. Goldberg emphatically denied the charge. 
INDIANAPOLIS, June 16— The Indiana Democratic State Convention adopted today a resolution urging “prompt and orderly disengagement” of American forces from South east Asia. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, June 17‐(Reuters)—The trial of a United States marine accused of the murder of 16 Vietnamese women and children was ad journed today because two wit nesses were missing and a third was sick with malaria. 
WASHINGTON, June 17 (Reu ters)—Eight war protesters, all men, were arrested today by Defense Department policemen after they held an unauthorized religious service at the Penta gon. It was the third day of demonstrations organized by the Episcopal Youth Fellowship in the Pentagon's main shop ping area. So far, 29 persons have been arrested. 
MOSCOW, June 17—The So viet Union affirmed its opposi tion today to the convening of an international conference for negotiating an end to the fight ing in Indochina. 
Saigon's War Captives
KNOXVILLE, Tenn., June 17 — Seventeen persons were bound over from the City Court to the Knox County grand jury today on charges of disturbing public worship when President Nixon visited a rally by the Rev. Billy Graham in the Uni versity of Tennessee Stadium May 28. Bond for each was set at $1,000. Included in the group was Dr. Kenneth Newton, 47 carries a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 17 (AP)—James L. Buck ley, the Conservative party's cnadidate for the United States Senate candidate from New York, described the allied thrust into Cambodian border areas today as “a hell of a successful operation.” 
WASHINGTON, June 17 (UPI) —A military appeals court has overthrown two desertion con victions against the first Ameri can G. I. to return to the United States after leaving his Vietnam unit and seeking asylum in Sweden. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 17 — Vietnamese Communist troops cut Cambodia's last working railway line today, capturing more than 200 tons of rice and other food supplies from a freight train about 40 miles northwest of here. 
William M. Kunstler, law yer for such militants as the Chicago Seven, warned a group of business executives here today that “unless there is some shift in economic policies, some reconsidera tion of the concept of private property and some unequiv ocal act that would hasten the end of the Vietnam war, Armageddon is at hand.” 
DENVER, June 17—While the United States Conference of Mayors was meeting here this week, 1970 census figures were published showing that in the last decade the population of the Denver suburbs has grown larger than the city's—580,000 to 512,000. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 17, (UPI) — The Cam bodian Parliament asked the United Nations today to send United Nations forces to pro tect the renowned temple ruins' at Angkor if the world body cannot obtain by other means the evacuation of the area by the North Vietnam ese, Vietcong and Pathet Lao forces. 
Theodore C. Sorensen, whose candidacy for the Democratic nomination for Senator has prompted opposition from por tions of the party's Reform fac tion, acted to affirm his liberal credentials, on two fronts yes terday. 
PRINCETON, N. J., June 17— Campus unrest is regarded by Americans as the country's leading problem, according to the latest Gallup Poll. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 17 (AP)—The United States military command an nounced today that it had sus pended for 30 days the cre dentials of George Esper, a cor respondent for The Associated Press, for violating the com mand's rules governing the publication of military informa tion. 
In an unusual work stop page for peace, several thou sand members of the book publishing and film industries observed a day of “positive action” yesterday to mobilize support for political candi dates opposed to the Indo china war. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, Friday, June 19 (UPI)—A young corporal in the United States Marine Corps told a court martial today that he had watched four other marines, on the orders of their patrol leader, shoot to death 16 Vietnamese women and children at a hamlet in the Oueson valley.
WASHINGTON, June 18— With considerable interparty jockeying, the Senate moved today to break the legislative logjam created by its protract ed Cambodian debate by agree ing to hold evening sessions to consider Administration bills.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 18 — Vietnamese Communist troops today cut the last major surface route open in Cambodia, the highway linking Pnompenh with Saigon.
Effects of Rent Law
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 18 (UPI)—Fighting in In dochina last week killed 130 Americans and wounded 364, the United States command reported today. The number killed, an increase over the pre vious week, included 93 men slain in South Vietnam and 37 in Cambodia.
LOS ANGELES, June 18— Conservatives who now domi nate the Board of Regents of the University of California in sisted today on hearing a stu dent investigative group's accu sation that members of the faculty supported an antiwar strike at the Berkeley campus this spring.
NEWARK, June 18—Senator Harrison A. Williams Jr., the Democratic candidate for re election, assailed the Nixon Ad ministration tonight in a de bate with Nelson G. Gross, the Republican candidate. It was their first confrontation of the campaign.
WASHINGTON, June 18— Following is a summary of the legislative proposals that have been placed befbre the Senate or that may be offered on the subject of Presidential powers to direct the war in Southeast Asia:
June 18, 1970
WASHINGTON, June 18— The Nixon Administration was described by senior officials to day as gravely concerned over the situation in Cambodia, particularly over the fate of Pnompenh, which is under in creasing military pressure.
PARIS, June 18—The Viet cong today denied as “a vile calumny” reports of a massacre by Communist forces in the village of Thanhmy, south of Danang, on June 10.
WASHINGTON, June 18 (AP)—The police arrested 44 demonstrated at the Pentagon today for trying to attend mass for peace in the huge building's crowded concourse.
WASHINGTON, June 19 — Two Vietnam veterans impli cated in the killing of civilians in Songmy, Vietnam, were ord ered today to stand trial before a military court on charges of murder and other offenses. 
Loan to Turkey
Members of the Socialist par ty, one of the oldest political institutions in the country, gath ered here yesterday for their national convention and imme diately heard warnings that at tempts on the left to form new third party would “guar antee the re‐election of Rich ard M. Nixon in 1972.” 
DANANG, South Vietnam, June 19 (AP) — A military judge today denied a motion for the acquittal of one of four United States marines charged with murdering 16 Vietnamese women and children in Son thang village on Feb. 16. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, June 19— Communist forces are said to have stepped up troop move ments in southern Laos amid indications that they are stock ing the region as an expanded supply base for the war in Vietnam. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 19 (AP)—Communist pressure increased floral of this capital today as fresh fighting was re ported to have erupted on the road to the historic temples of Angkor. 
MINERALS WELLS, Tex., June 19 (UPI)—A 22‐year‐old South Vietnamese Air Force cadet drowned today when fel low classmates tossed him in a motel swimming pool to cele brate his first solo flight. Seven cadets had gathered at the motel for a party after taking up their military helicopters for the first time at the train ing school at Fort Wolters. The victim's name was withheld. 
NEW DELHI, June 19 — A three‐nation task force seeking peace in Cambodia was report ed today to have failed in its efforts to persuade New Delhi to endorse its approach for solving the Indochina problem. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 19 (Reuters) — Thailand's Premier, Thanom Kittikachorn, conferred with the principal American and South Vietnam ese military commanders when he made an unexpected seven‐ hour visit to South Vietnam to day. 
A Queens soldier was granted the right yesterday to try to prove in Federal Court his claim that the war in Vietnam is unconstitutional. 
LONDON, June 19—More than most traditional govern ing parties returning to power after an interlude, the Con servative party takes office in Britain with a specific mandate for change. 
Amid persistent student complaints that higher education is “irrelevant” has come the disclosure that American scholarship on much of Southeast Asia and particularly North Vietnam, ranges from inadequate to non‐existent. Insufficient Federal support of all international studies is a factor contributing to the neglect. But it is only part of the story. The fact that a combination of the difficulty of the languages and much academic opposition to war‐related studies has allowed these crucial areas to be shunted aside.
WASHINGTON, June 20 — Colleges and universities that close this fall to give students and faculty time to work in political campaigns will have to add an equal amount of time to the school year or run the risk of losing their tax‐exempt status. 
HONG KONG, June 20 (Reu ters)—The Hanoi radio said to day that United States aircraft and ground forces had fired on a number of North Vietnamese villages during the nest week. 
DANANG, South Vietnam June 20 (AP) — A 21‐year‐old United States marine testified today that he did not intention ally shoot any of the five Viet namese women and 11 children alleged to have been slain by a patrol of marines on Feb. 19. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, June 21—Enemy forces struck north of Pnompenh yes terday in an apparent effort to seize the upper reaches of the Mekong River and speed the flow of troops and supplies in to Cambodia. 
PARIS, June 20 (Reuters)— A three‐man Asian delegation working to bring peace to Indo china arrived here today for talks with Foreign Minister Maurice Schumann.
OKLAHOMA CITY, June 20 (AP)—A concentrated mail cam paign to recruit 40,000 Roman Catholic clergymen for the antiwar movement has been an nounced. 
COLUMBIA, S. C.—As the war in Vietnam drags on, the Army is finding itself in creasingly plagued by a growing struggle of another sort—against dissidents in its ranks. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 20 (UPI) — A fistfight, accompanied by shouting and screaming, today marked the National Assembly debate on controversial legislation to give President Nguyen Van Thieu full emergency powers for five months to cope with the nation's eco nomic problems. The police fired tear gas to break up the clash.
HANOI, North Vietnam, June 20 (Agence France‐Presse)—A new campaign to increase rice production was announced here yesterday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 14—Since 1963 when the An Quang Buddhists— whose leader is Thich Tri Quang— helped bring about the down fall of President Ngo Dinh Diem, their disapproval of all other governments here has provided continual jolts throughout the nation. 
For two decades the Na tional Council of Churches has been taking liberal stands on issues like the war in Vietnam while millions of churchgoers fretted, fumed and angrily accused the ecu menical agency of being out of touch with grassroots Protestant opinion. The 250‐ member general board of the council, which represents most major Protestant and Orthodox churches in this country, is now drafting a major overhaul of the council at its quarterly meeting in Washington which could bring some of the changes long sought by conservatives.
As D. Keith Mano tells it in his new novel, shortly after the end of the Vietnam war American liberalism has swept into the jungles of the Central American banana republic of Camaguay to quell a “national liberation” movement. The ste rility of soul that leads serious men to think they are making love when they are in a gang bang persists. “I cherish two things only in life,” says Sgt. Clarence Hook, the hero. “My religion and my liberty.” Com munism, he adds, is inimical to both. 
PHILADELPHIA, June 20 (UPI) — Representative F. Ed ward Hebert, chairman of the House Armed Services Commit tee on Reserves, said today that a way must be found to re turn American servicemen from Vietnam. “It's got to he done with our flag flying on high and not dragging in the dirt,” the Louisiana Democrat told the 24th national convention of the Reserve Officers Association. “There can he no compromise.” 
In a six‐month survey of more than 5,000 students at 39 randomiy selected colleges and universities, two Swarth more College psychologists have concluded that the Viet 312km war has greatly changed students' attitudes toward ca reers, parents, religion, politics and the United States in gen eral.
Withdrawing From South Korea
The Penn Central said last week that it was clearing away weeds and shrubs along itsi New Haven Division right‐of way with a spray that contains a chemical herbicide almost en tirely banned by the Pentagon in Vietnam.
CLEVELAND, June 20—Vice President Agnew accused eight of President Nixon's most out‐ spoken antiwar critics tonight of prescribing surrender to achieve peace in Indochina. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 20 — American military and diplomatic analysts believe most South Vietnamese forces will be withdrawn from Cam bodia within a few days after the June 30 deadline announced by President Nixon for the pull out of all United States troops. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 20 (AP)—Bob Whittaker, a free lance photographer on assign ment for Life magazine, was wounded seriously yesterday when North Vietnamese troops ambushed an American tank unit in Cambodia. Mr. Whit taker, 31 years old, was report ed in satisfactory condition to day in a United States Army hospital in Saigon.
Casa Guidi
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 21 — Reliable military sources disclosed today that United States fighter‐bombers and gun ships, which have been restrict ed to flying a maximum of 21.7 miles into Cambodia in support of ground operations, have been ranging much deeper into northeast Cambodia for nearly two months in raids on new enemy infiltration routes. 
Heated face‐to‐face argu ments among the four candi dates for the Democratic nom ination for Senator broke out yesterday during and after their next‐to‐last television de bate of the campaign. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam china intensified on a dozen weekend of fighting since the in April. Allied forces re ported that more than 220 North Vietnamese and Viet cong soldiers had been killed. 
WASHINGTON, June 21 — The National Council of Churches, a federation of Prot estant and Eastern Orthodox denominations, agreed here today to call a National Ecu menical Consultation that would include Roman Catholics, Southern Baptists and other evangelical churches. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, June 21—A 21‐year‐old marine was convicted of premeditated murder today in the fatal shoot ing of 12 Vietnamese civilians during a patrol on Feb. 19. He was sentenced to life imprison ment at hard labor.
WASHINGTON, June 21 (AP) —The conduct of Vice Presi dent Agnew has been disgrace ful, divisive and damaging, Senator George McGovern, Democrat of South Dakota, said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, June 22 (Reuters)— The Vietnam Guardian, an English‐language newspaper, warned in an editorial today that following initial military successes “things seem to have turned sour in Cambodia.” 
LONDON — A young man writes from America. In his last year at a college in the Middle West he did some part time teaching. He had an ex perience that he still cannot altogether understand, that he cannot forget. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 21 (Reuters)—A 12‐man ??elect committee from the United States House of Rep resentatives and Secretary of the Navy John H. Chafee ar rived in Saigon today on sepa rate aircraft for visits to South Vietnam. 
KOMPONG SPED, Cambodia, June 22 — A Cambodian Army officer declared here today that “the population now has more fear of the South Vietnamese than of the Vietcong.”
WASHINGTON, June 22 (UPI) — Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, asked President Nixon in a letter today to exempt Ameri can forces in Cambodia and air crews flying missions over Laos from payment of United States income taxes. Servicemen in Vietnam already enjoy the ex emption under a 1965 Execu tive order.
The contract covering 22,000 workers in New York City voluntary hospitals expires next Tuesday, with every present sign pointing to a strike. That is an un conscionable prospect, both because it would en danger the lives of the sick and because the pre ponderance of Negroes and Puerto Ricans among the workers would aggravate racial tensions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 22—The nine‐year‐old program of spraying chemical defoliants and herbicides to strip the cover from enemy‐controlled base areas in South Vietnam and to kill rice crops in such regions has been suspended, American military sources dis closed today. They said the program was stopped without announcement nearly two months ago.
YONKERS, June 22 — Keith Drake, candidate for the Demo cratic nomination in the 25th Congessional District, today clarified his position on Nixon Administration policies in Southeast Asia.
W. A. Swanberg, the biogra pher of Hearst, Pulitzer and Dreiser, has rejected an hon orary doctorate from North western University because of his “strong opposition to Amer ican militarism,” which he charged was subsidizing the university.
ST. LOUIS, June 22 (AP)— Americans are uninformed, in effective critics of their politi cal institutions and complain ers about government who take no steps to make it better, a former Cabinet member said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 22 (UPI)—United States troop strength in South Viet nam is at its lowest point in nearly 40 months, American military spokesmen said today.
WASHINGTON, June 22 — The Senate, modifying its pending Cooper‐Church amendment, overwhelmingly ac knowledged today that the President, as Commander in Chief, had the power to take certain military actions in Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 22 — Units of two Ameri can battalions reportedly pulled out of Cambodia today from border regions where they had been searching for enemy faci lities.
WASHINGTON, June 22 (AP) —United States Appeals Court Judge Albert V. Bryan ordered Jerry Rubin, the Yippie leader, today to start serving a 30‐day jail sentence for disorderly con duct during antiwar demonstra tions in 1967. He will serve the term in the Alexandria, Va., city jail.
WASHINGTON, June 23 — Nixon Administration forces acted today to bring to an end the protracted Senate debate on Cambodia in the hope of keeping the Democrats from focusing further political at tention on the war issue. 
CHICAGO, June 23—At least 760 campuses—about 30 per cent of all colleges and univer sities in the country—played some role last month in the first national student strike in American history, a private re search group reported today.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 23 — Enemy forces attacked Prek Tameak, a town on the Mekong River 20 miles north of Pnompenh last night but were repulsed by Cambodian troops after a night of fighting.
Efforts to restore Congressional responsibility in the warmaking process and to limit Presidential expansion of the war in Indochina have been unwisely weakened by the latest modification of the Cooper‐Church amend ment in the Senate.
Representatives Adam Clay ton Powell and Leonard Farb stein were defeated for renomi nation yesterday in upsets in the Democratic primary elec tion. 
WASHINGTON, June 23 (Reu ters)—Secretary of State Wil liam P. Rogers has cautioned his advisers to pay attention to the legal implications of United States actions in future inter national crises. 
The following dispatch is the second of a series by Richard Dudman, chief Washington correspondent of The St. Louis Post‐Dispatch, who has returned home after being held prisoner by the Vietnamese Communists for six weeks and then released together with two other Ameri can newsmen.
LONDON, June 23—Secre tary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that South Viet namese forces would be free to operate anywhere in Cam bodia after June 30.
American Interests
WASHINGTON, June 23—The Army dismissed criminal charges today against a briga dier general and two other of ficers implicated in an alleged cover‐up of the Songmy inci dent. 
WASHINGTON, June 23 (UPI)—Senator Charles E. Goodell, Republican of New York, said today that if the United States was still in volved in the Vietnam war by 1972, “I will not support President Nixon for re‐dec tion.” 
WASHTNGTON, June 24 (UPI) —Lient. Charles R. Saxbe, ?? Marine officer, wrote to his father, Senator William B. Saxbe, Republican of Ohio “If this war doesn't end soon, I see an underground, develops ment that would seek to dis rupt the country with arson, sabotage and assassination.”
DANANG, South Vietnam, June 24 (AP)—A young ma rine who testified he had never kille danyone, even an enemy in combat, was ac quitted today of charges of having taken part in the slaying of 16 Vietnamese women and children on a patrol in February.
WASHINGTON, June 24— Following is the text of the Gulf of Tonkin resolution on military action in Indochina, which the Senate voted today to repeal:
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, June 24— President Nixon has invited leaders from 40 newspapers and broadcasting networks to a five‐and‐a‐half‐hour private briefing Friday at the Presi dential compound in San Cle mente, Calif.
WASHINGTON, June 24— The 1964 Gulf of Tonkin reso lution, which the Senate voted to repeal today, was conceived in crisis and haste as a demon stration of national unity. It came to be depicted—at least by Johnson Administration of ficials—as a declaration of Congressional authority for the American involvement in Vie nam.
BOULDER, Colo., June 24 (AP)—In a light municipal turnout, a resolution urging “prompt withdrawal of all United States military per sonnel from Southeast Asia in a manner consistent with their safety” was defeated yesterday by a 4,960‐ to 4.401 vote.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 24 (Reuters)—Twelve visiting American Congressmen today continued their visits to United States and South Viet namese military units and vil lages in South Vietnam and Cambodia. The Representatives, members of the House Select Committee on Southeast Asia, arrived in Saigon Sunday for a two‐week visit to investigate United States military involve ment in Southeast Asia.
DENVER, June 24—Vice Pres ident Agnew said here tonight that the lengthy Senate debate over the President's war‐mak ing powers proved that the Senate was “not suited to crisis response.”
WASHINGTON, June 24— President Nixon has “signifi cant support” among college educators for sending United States troops into Cambodia, professors said at a news con ference here today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 24—A controversial bill that would give President Nguyen Van Thieu extraordinary eco nomic powers for five months was passed by the National As sembly today and sent to the Senate.
WASHINGTON, June 24 — The Senate voted today in favor of repeal of the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution, once interpreted as the statutory equivalent of a declaration of war in Vietnam.The legal effect of the action, by a vote of 81 to 10, is prob ably minimal since the Nixon Administration has stated that it is not relying on the resolu tion, enacted at the request of President Lyndon B. Johnson, as authority for current policies in Indochina. But the vote may have marked a turning point in the increasingly acerbic bick ering in the Senate over the war.
The Senate, acting on a resolution offered by a conservative Republican Senator, voted 81 to 10 yesterday in favor of repeal of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. The Administra tion has said that it does not need the reso lution—passed in 1964 and pointed to by President Johnson as the legal basis for esca lating the Vietnam war—to justify the cur rent American involvement. [Page 1, Col. 1.]
LOUISVILLE, Ky., June 24 (UPI)—The President of the American Baptists Association urged yesterday that Americans forget partisan arguments over the Vietnam war and pray that divine providence bring Amer ica victory.
PARIS, June 24 (UPI)—A retired United States Govern ment teacher said today that he was willing to work in North Vietnam in exchange for the freedom of his son, a prisoner of war.
WASHINGTON, June 24 — Twenty years have passed since President Harry S. Truman led the country* into what he skit tishly called a “police action” in Korea, and the controversy thus raised about a President's power to make war still haunts this capital.
The following dispatch is the third in a series by Richard Dudman, chief Washington cor respondent of The St. Louis Post‐Dispatch, who has returned home after being held prisoner by the Vietnamese Communists for six weeks and then being released with two other Ameri can newsmen.
Advertising People Against the War is a new group that has created newspaper and television advertising that can be used by local groups.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., June 25 — President Nixon will deliver his final report on the American operations in Cambodia next Tuesday.
WASHINGTON, June 25— Following are excerpts from a news conference held here today by Secretary of State William P. Rogers:

The Senate has repealed the Tonkin Gulf resolution with the same haste and confusion of purpose that attended its adoption six years ago.
ST. LOUIS, June 25—Pres ident Nixon came to Middle America today and appealed to young businessmen to help him bridge the generation gap and bring racial peace to the nation. Facing an audi ence of 12,000 delegates in Kiel Auditorium at the 50th annual meeting of the Jaycees, Mr. Nixon received the most enthusiastic reception of his Presidency to date. The sev en‐minute ear‐splitting stand ing ovation came from whistle‐blowing Indiana dele gates dressed as referees, Alabamians waving Ameri can flags, Oklahomans in Indian war dress, young en trepreneurs from Colorado in buckskin coats, staid Virgin ians in coats and ties. It was the kind of audience modern Presidents can confront with out fear, but to which this Republican President, a formes Jaycee, offers special appeal. No demonstrators and few blacks were present, and what the audience seemed to want to hear was that the country was in pretty good shape and the economy was sound.
WASHINGTON, June 25— The Senate agreed today to end its prolonged debate on Cambodia Tuesday and voting then on the Cooper‐Church amendment to restrict future military activities in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, June 24— One hundred executives from almost as many national cor porations flew from New York to the capital today in a move to bring an end to the Vietnam war.

DALLAS, June 25 (UPI)— Gary Allen Deeds was sen tenced to a four‐year prison term yesterday by a Dallas jury that found him guilty of burn ing an American flag.
North Vietnam has reported ly declared that a list of 334 American prisoners, compiled by a peace group in New York, is a complete list of all pri soners held in North Vietnam and has insisted that it does not hold any men who are not on the list.
Guidelines for Draft
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 25—A Government spokesman announced that today's issue of 10 Saigon newspapers had been seized. Eight were accused of erroneously having reported an alleged bombing mishap in Rachgia province in the Mekong delta. The newspapers said Gov ernment aircraft had strafed fishing vessels off Rachgia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 25 (Reuters)—Maj. Gen. Charles C. Noble today assumed com mand of United States Army Engineers in South Vietnam. He succeeds Brig. Gen. Robert M. Tarbox, who took over the command last month following the death in a helicoper crash of his predecessor, Maj. Gen. John Dillard.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 25—Five thousand South Vietnamese troops began a new operation in rugged northeast ern Cambodia yesterday, less than a week before the dead line set by President Nixon for withdrawal of American troops from Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, June 25 (AP) —Senator Stephen M. Young, Democrat of Ohio, accepted today petitions opposing the Indochina war. Sponsors said that the signatures numbered 75,000. Roger Evans of Cleve land, chairman of the Ohio Peace Petition Committee, pre sented the petitions to Mr. Young.
PARIS, June 25—The Viet nam peace talks remained blocked today as each side ac cused the other of aggression and of rigid refusal to heed the other's proposals.
PROVIDENCE, R. I., June 25 — A Liberal Roman Catholic priest who opposes the war in Indochina won the Republican nomination for the United States Senate tonight, becoming the first priest ever to run for the Senate.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 25 (UPI)—United States combat deaths in Indochina last week were at their lowest level since the end of March, but the number of wounded was near ly double that of the previous week, the United States com mand reported today.
ATLANTA, June 25—A Fed eral district judge ordered to day a temporary halt to the Army's prosecution of a soldier accused of murdering Vietnam ese civilians at Songymy.
Governor Rockefeller and his Democratic opponent, Arthur J. Goldberg, played political at tack and counterattack for the first time yesterday. The Gov ernor charged that Mr. Gold berg “supported the war poli cies” of President Johnson, and the Democrat charged that Mr. Rockefeller supported President Nixon's “enlargement of the Indochina war.”
WASHINGTON, June 25 — The United States today for mally announced the launching of a broadly based diplomatic campaign in the Middle East to encourage Israel and the Arab countries to “stop shoot ing and start talking” under United Nations auspices.
DULUTH, Minn., June 26 (UFI) — The Minnesota State Democrat ‐ Farmer ‐ Labor party helped Hubert H. Humphrey lalong the comeback trail today, but adopted a peace plank very close to that advocated by Sen ator Eugene J. McCarthy two years ago. 
WASHINGTON, June 26— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird today reiterated Washing ton's plan to continue American bombing raids inside Cambodia after the June 30 deadline for the withdrawal of American troops here. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 26—Scattered fighting was re ported at several points within 35 miles of this capital today, but elsewhere in Cambodia military activity remained gen erally low for the third con secutive day. 
SAN FRANCISCO, June 26 (AP) — Speakers commemo rating the signing of the United Nations Charter here 25 years ago pleaded today for peace in Indochina, a set tlement in the Middle East and general acceptance of postwar European borders. 
WASHINGTON, June 26— The Senate today redefined once again the proposed amendment to limit Presiden tial authority to conduct mili tary operations in Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam June 26 (AP) — The United States Command announced to day that a United States Navy escort plane attacked gun posi tions deep inside North Viet nam yesterday after the guns had fired on a reconnaissance aircraft the Navy plane was es corting. 
DAYTON, Ohio, June 26 — The prestigious Conference of Major Superiors of Men made its debut this week in the arena of social action after 13 years of strictly fraternal, private an nual gatherings. 
WASHINGTON, June 26 — The Defense Department today rejected as incomplete and un acceptable a list of prisoners of war compiled by a peace group in New York and de scribed by Hanoi as a com plete list of the Americans it holds. 
To the Editor: A major war effort weighs heavily on our institutions and on our economy. But the ap proach of the critics of the Ad ministration is a wholly nega tive one. The President has only one policy often stated—to hold the line in Vietnam until the South Vietnamese Army is in a position to take over, this to coincide with a substantial withdrawal of our troops.
WHITE PLAINS, June 26— The school year in West chester County, marked as in many other places by pro test on the left, has closed on a note of concern along school administrators about activity on the right. 
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., June 26 — President Nixon told a closed‐door meeting of editors and executives from major news organizations today that he had chosen the course of orderly withdrawal from South Vietnam to reinforce America's role in world affairs and thus secure a “lasting peace.” 
“WHEN you were still up on Broadway you could hear the ruckus, the hol lering. The peace demonstrators trying to outshout the construction workers. The construction workers hollering, ‘U.S.A., all the way’ and ‘We're Num ber One.’ And the peace demonstra tors screaming up there that the war was unjust and everything else, right by the Treasury Building on Broad Street there.
Saigon, South Vietnam, June 27—President Nguyen Van Thieu pledged today to help the Cambodian Government de fend itself from the Commu nists, but he did not make clear the extent of the help.
A RECURRENT nightmare for many Americans is that our national preoccupation with Indochina and the resultant turmoil on our home front may induce us to sit paralyzed while the power balance shifts drastically against us.
LINCOLN, Neb., June 27 — The Church of the Brethren overwhelmingly approved to day an official church position endorsing nonviolent draft re sistance as an acceptable op tion for draft‐age young men.
Americans are likely to forget that neither repeal of the Tonkin Gulf Resolution last week nor the sched uled withdrawal of all American ground forces from Cambodia within the next few days is likely to mean that American military personnel will no longer be employed in combat operations beyond the borders of South Vietnam. The air war continues. Indeed, the President in his interim report on Cambodia earlier this month admitted that after July 1 there will remain “air missions to interdict the movement of enemy troops and material where I find this is necessary protect the lives and security of our forces in South Vietnam.”
PRINCETON, N. J., June 27 — The number of Americans who think the United States was wrong to have become involved in Vietnam is again increasing, according to the Gallup Poll.
CLEVELAND, June 27— Steve Eichstaedt, a Vietnam veteran, who hasn't won a penny this year on the $6.5‐ million pro golf tour, surprised the regular campaigners today. The 23‐year‐old professional from Miami scored a five‐ under‐par 65 in the second round of the $150,000 Cleve land open and moved into a second‐place tie with an ag gregate of 135, one stroke off the pace.
BOSTON, June 27 (AP)—The U.S.S. Yorktown was de commissioned here today after more than 27 years of service, bridging three wars. The air craft carrier, christened in 1943, served in World War II, the Korean War and the war in Vietnam.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 27 — Cambodian troops have withdrawn from their last gar risons in Ratanakiri Province, leaving that northeastern prov ince and three others to the enemy, the Government military spokesman announced today.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 27—Authoritative military sources here disclosed today that United States planes would provide close air support— bombing, strafing and rocket at tacks—for Cambodian troops engaged in combat anywhere in Cambodia.
BOSTON, June 27 (AP)—Jo siah A. Spaulding, a 47‐year‐ old political moderate, was en dorsed by the Republican state convention today to oppose Senator Edward M. Kennedy for the Senate.
WASHINGTON — The pro longed Senate debate on Cam bodia will come to a probably confusing end this week. Inevit ably the underlying constitution al issues were being obscured in the politicking between the White House and the Democrat ic‐controlled Senate.
I can think of no writer who has nubbed the horrifying in terior life of urban America better than Irvin Faust. Mr. Faust's collection of stories, “Roar Lion Roar,” and his first novel, “The Steagle,” laid bare the guts, bones and geography of New York with invention, style and a heartbreaking clar ity. In “The File on Stanley Patton Buchta,” we again have a keenly‐felt perception of New York, as Stan Buchta, Hofstra graduate, Vietnam hero and city cop, spreads himself across the landscape with the power and mobility of an octo pus.
WASHINGTON, June 27 (UPI) —“As one hard‐hat to another,” Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe has applauded con struction ‘workers’ patriotism but deplored violence against antiwar demoristrators as “risk ing an increasing, alienation of our young neonle.”
Governor Rockefeller, de scribing himself yesterday as a “strong peace candidate” in his bid for a fourth term, accused Arthur J. Goldberg of having acted as “world spokesman for President [Lyndon B.] John son's war policy” during Mr. Goldberg's three years as chief United States delegate at the United Nations.
WASHINGTON, June 27—A Congressional watchdog com mittee recommended today that South Vietnam promptly deval ue its currency to dampen in flation, curb corruption and protect the morale and morals of Americans fighting and working in that country.
A 23‐year Lold former soldier who went A.W.O.L. from Fort Dix to escape being “shang haied” to Vietnam has won his release from service on the ground that his basic training had turned him into a conscien tious objector.
WASHINGTON, June 27— The Nixon Administration be lieves that the use of South Vietnamese and Thai combat troops and air forces in Cam bodia, combined with a limited supply of United States weap ons and continued bombing of Communist supply lines, will save the regime of Premier Lon Nol in Pnompenh.
WASHINGTON, June 2—Sen ator Mark O. Hatfield, Republi can of Oregon, said today that unles the war was ended and the economy improved “then just may not be a Nixon‐Agnew ticket in 1972.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 27—As American sol diers near the end of their two‐month incursion into suspected North Vietnamese and Vietcong sanctuaries in Cambodia and return to South Vietnam, the course of the war in Southeast Asia appears vastly more compli cated and uncertain than be fore the incursion began. 
FORT LEWIS, Wash., June 28 (UPI)—Six soldiers who were denied conscientious objector status have been arrested for refusing shipment to Vietnam, and their attorney, Charles H. W. Talbot, said today that he would go before United States District Judge George H. Boldt in Tacoma tomorrow to seek a restraining order. 
OKLAHOMA CITY, June 2R (UPI)—Roman Catholics throughout Oklahoma today were read a letter condemn ing United States involve ment in Indochina from the Most Rev. Victor J. Reed, Bishop of Oklahoma. 
SAN FRANCISCO, June 28 —Secretary of State William P. Rogers conferred for 90 minutes here today with Ru mania's Foreign Minister, Cor neliu Manescu, who will meet tomorrow morning with Presi dent Nixon at the Western White House at San Clemente, Calif.
Arthur J. Goldberg, the Dem ocratic candidate for Governor, scoffed yesterday at Governor Rockefeller's description of him self as a “strong peace candi date.” 
TOKYO, June 28 —To the countries of East and Southeast Asia, President Nixon's Guam doctrine has an appealing ring, and Asian lip service to the doctrine is enthusiastic. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 28—As American troops continued their withdrawal from Cambodia, scheduled to be completed by Tuesday, a slight increase in enemy activity was reported throughout South Viet nam in the last 48 hours. 
SAIGON, June 28—The Gov ernment of South Vietnam plans sweeping economic reforms, but requires at least $200‐million in emergency aid from the United States to tide it over a severe inflationary crisis, Economics Minister Pham Kim Ngoc said in an interview here.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, June 28— Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland, proposed today that the United States initiate a graduated cease‐fire in Vietnam in an at tempt to improve the climate for a negotiated peace. 
MILWAUKEE, June 28— Radicals from a wide spectrum of organizations gathered here this weekend to plan new strategies to end the war in Southeast Asia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 28—South Vietnamese voted today for city and pro‐ vincial councilmen in an elec tion that has centered on do mestic concerns but that may play an important role in the future of national politics. 
TOKYO, June 28 (AP)—North Vietnam contended today that the United States had achieved none of its objectives in the military incursion into Cam bodia and was conducting “a campaign of deception.” A dis patch by the North Vietnamese press agency said that the United States “cannot help pull ing its troops out of Cambodia by June 30, although none of its objectives has been at tained.” 
DANANG, South Vietnam, June 28—Two fresh enemy in fantry regiments are making their way from North Vietnam through Laos toward the north ernmost province of South Vietnam, according to high ranking American and Viet namese military men. But they insist they are not worried by this development. 
WASHINGTON, June 29— The Senate rebuffed a Republi can attempt today to force an immediate vote on the so‐called end‐the‐war amendment, which has become the rallying point for Senate doves.
SAIGON, June 29 (AP)—As the last American combat troops withdrew from Cambo dia today, Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops renewed their assault on the Cambodian munitions depot at Longvek, 23 miles north of Pnompenh, and shelled Cambodian troop positions with mortars in the Siemreap‐Angkor area in the northwest.
Paul Adams, the Conserva tive party candidate for Gov ernor, criticized his two oppo nents last night for their stands on American foreign policy.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., June 29—President Nixon conferred with Secretary Rogers today amid recurring reports that the Administration was preparing to take new diplomatic steps to add life to the Paris peace negotiations.
TORONTO, June 29—The Bank of Nova Scotia, a leading Canadian bank, said today that “the sudden movement of Unit ed States troops into Cam bodia” intensified pressures on the Canadian dollar and forced Ottawa's May 31 decision to let the dollar float freely in the foreign‐exchange market.
WASHINGTON, June 29— American ground troops are out of Cambodia on schedule. That is all to the good and emphasizes, rather than dimin ishes, the need for the Senate to pass the Cooper‐Church amendment on Tuesday.
FIRE SUPPORT BASE EUNICE, South Vietnam, June 28—Twenty‐one‐year‐ old S. Sgt. Stanley Zeager of Rocky River, Ohio—one of the more than 30,000 American soldiers sent to Cambodia— is back in Vietnam and glad of it.
WASHINGTON, June 29 — The Supreme Court put off until next term today a ruling on whether young men who op pose the Vietnam war but not Ian wars are entitled to be ex cused from military duty as conscientious objectors.
WASHINGTON, June 29— President Nixon's venture in to Cambodia is ending with proclamations of unprece dented military gain, but it was launched for the broader purpose of rescuing Cam bodia from sudden Corn mist domination and that purpose is still unrealized.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 29—Premier Lon Nol said today that he thought United States military intervention in his na tion had brought favorable re sults and also expressed opti mism about the development of the Cambodian Army.
STOCKHOLM, June 29 (UPI) —Sweden will open a perma nent diplomatic mission in Hanoi next month to handle in creased relations with North Vietnam, the Government an nounced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 29 — The last United States ground combat troops in Cam bodia scrambled back into the Central Highlands of South Vietnam this evening, ending two months of operations in Cambodia that, at the peak, had seen 18,000 American troops attacking Communist base and supply areas across the border.
SAN FRANCISCO, June 29— Secretary of State William P. Rogers warned North Vietnam today that it could not again count on a safe haven in Cam bodia despite the withdrawal of United States ground com bat forces from that country.
WASHINGTON, June 29 — Parents for Peace urged Presi dent Nixon today to end the war in Southeast Asia swiftly or, the group warned, the na tion will face “irreparable” harm to society.
SAIGON, June 29 (UPI)— South Vietnam's losses in the Cambodian operation were placed today at 866 killed and 3,724 wounded. The Vietnamese Communist losses were put at 14,488 killed and 1,427 captured.
HONG KONG, June 30—The withdrawal of United States troops from Cambodia prompted no immediate plaudits from the Communist countries in Asia.
CINCINNATI, June 30—Roy Wilkins urged Negroes today to reject again those ideas being put forth that advocate a separation of the races.
The most important result of the American “incursion” into Cambodia which ended yesterday is not the dubious military achievement claimed by the President in his lengthy report from San Clemente but the political reaction on Capitol Hill as reflected in Senate passage of the Cooper‐Church amendment.
VIENTIANE, Laos, June 30 (AP)—The National Assembly gave an informal vote of confidence today to the Premier, Prince Souvanna Phouma. The vote followed reports of increasing rightist pressure because of recent North Vietnamese advances in southern Laos.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, June 30—The last American advisers and support troops withdrew from Cambodia today, 63 days after major allied operations began against North Vietnamese and Vietcong sanctuaries.

BAYONNE, N. J., June 30—There will be no moratOrium on the drafting of men from this city into the armed forces.
WASHINGTON, June 30—The main point of President Nixon's final report on the Cambodian operation today was that he has proved himself a man of his word who ought now to be trusted by his people at home and taken seriously by his adversaries abroad.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., June 30 (UPI)—Following is the text of President Nixon's report on the newly completed American military operation in Cambodia, made public today at the Western White House:
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, June 30—Forty American trucks were driven today from South Vietnam to Cambodia—the most publicized gift of United States aid to Cambodia so far. The trucks carried about 1,000 Vietnamese soldiers of Cambodian descent as well as supplies.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., June 30—President Nixon today announced the “successful” completion of the American incursion in Cambodia, ruled out the use of American troops there in the future and suggested that the country's defense would be left largely to the Cambodians and their Asian allies.
WASHINGTON, June 30—Following is the text, as amended, of the amendment to fly foreigri military sales bill offered by Senators Frank Church, Democrat of Idaho, and John Sherman Cooper, Republican of Kentucky, adopted today by the Senate:
WASHINGTON, June 30—With President Nixon placing renewed emphasis on diplomatic efforts to end the Vietnam war, the State Department today indicated more flexibility in the United States approach to the formation of a coalition Government in Saigon.
WASHINGTON, June 30 (AP) —Senator Mike Gravel, Democrat of Alaska, told the Senate tonight that an organization calling itself the National Socialist White People's party—the former American Nazi party —was urging the assassination of several dovish members of the Senate.
James L. Buckley, the Conservative party candidate for United States Senator, strongly urged President Nixon yesterday to announce that no draftee would have to fight in Vietnam after April 1.
DETROIT, June 30 — The president of the American Library Association called today for “more vigorous responses” to what he characterized as a growing threat to intellectual freedom stemming from “hysterical charges and counter charges.”
A solders's contenuon that combat activities in Indochina were unconstitutional because Congress had not declared war was rejected yesterday by a Federal judge in Brooklyn.
MANILA, Thursday, July 2—In a speech that appeared to be aimed at members of the United States Senate, Thailand's Foreign Minister, Thanat Khoman, today denounced “some Western politicians” for “hounding, harassing and persecuting” member Governments of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization to serve “domestic personal gains.”
WASHINGTON, July 1—After the President's expansion of the.war into Cambodia had created intense controversy throughout the country, President Nixon announced that he would look into the Cambodian invasion at the end of June and report to the people.
When he retired in March, 1969, after eight years as United States Ambassador to the Court of St. James's—the longest any one had held that post—David K. E. Bruce, was America's senior Ambassador. Before the London assignment he had been Ambassador in Paris and Bonn, At the age of 72, he is the only man ever to have served in this country's three leading embassies in Western Europe.
WASHINGTON, July 1 (AP) —The Justice Department today ordered an inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation into a recorded telephone message suggesting that antiwar Senators ought to be “shot between the eves.”
LOS ANGELES, July 1—President Nixon announced tonight the appointment of David K. E. Bruce to head the United States delegation at the Paris talks on Peace in Vietnam.
HONG KONG, July 1 (AP)—North Vietnam charged today that the United States, despite the withdrawal of its ground troops from Cambodia, was prolonging the war in Southeast Asia by aiding anti‐Communist forces.
To the Editor: The Guam Doctrine in essence contemplated that Asians shall fight Asians, if war be needed, for the attainment of American strategic objectives. But your June 25 editorial “Seoul Resists Koreanization” finds it “a discouraging augury” for the Administration's Vietnamization (read “Asianization”) program that. South Korea, protected and nurtured by the United States for twenty years, seemingly cannot_bear gradual reduction of the U. S. garrison force of 64,000 men down to a token ground force with residual air support.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 1 (AP) — More than 5,000 South Vietnamese troops swept areas north of Pnompenh today as over 800 Vietnamese soldiers of Cambodian descent arrived in a 40‐truck convoy to bolster the Cambodian capital's defenses.
WASHINGTON, July 1—Seldom if ever has a President suffered the sort of one‐two punch with which the Senate smote Mr. Nixon on Tuesday —passing the Cooper‐Church amendment on Cambodia and overriding the President's veto of the health aid bill, 76 to 19.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 1—Looting and pillage of Cambodian towns by South Vietnamese troops is increasing and has become a serious problem here at a time when the two countries, traditional enemies, are trying to establish an alliance against North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces.
Q. Mr. President, in your report on the Cambodian operation yesterday, you said you were going to emphasize the route of negotiated settlement again. A. Have you had any signal from Hanoi that they are more willing to talk than they have in the past and, B. Do you have any new propoisals to put to them to make a negotiated settlement more attrartive?
Having drawn back from a wider confrontation Indochina, President Nixon has taken an encouraging step toward reviving the Paris negotiations. His ap pointment of David K. E. Bruce to head the United States delegation at the Paris peace talks is a useful advance.
PHILADELPHIA, July 2 (AP) — Pennsylvania's Su preme Court says that it is legal under state law to dese crate the American flag “if the desecration takes place at a political demonstration.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 2—The war dogs, too, are out of Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, July 2 —Sponsors of Honor America Day sought today to show that the July 4 celebration would be nonpolitical, neutral on the war and an occasion at which long haired youths and “hard hat” patriots would feel welcome.
SAIGON, South Vietnam July 2—The first contingent of Cambodian troops to be trained in South Vietnam being instructed at Lamson in Pantry training center neat Nhatrang in central Vietnam South Vietnamese military sources said here today.
ATLANTA, July 2 — A Fed eral judge rulled today that a soldier accused of atrocities at Songmy could not be tried by court‐martial until a three‐man civilian judicial panel had de cided on the legality of the Vietnam war and the consti tutionality of the Army's Uni‐, form Code of Military Justice.
PARIS, July 2 — President Pompidou criticized President Nixon today and declared that peace could not come to Indo china until the Americans made up their minds to get out.
CINCINNATI, JULY 2—Direc tors of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored; People proposed today a corn‐; prehensive restructuring of higher education to attack the; causes of campus unrest.
WASHINGTON, July 2 —President Nixon's televised in terview on the Southeast Asian conflict won from Con gress today praise for his des ignation of a new peace nego tiator, some Democratic resent ment in the Senate and a new Republican peace proposal in the House.
MANILA, Friday, July 3—The annual meeting of the ministerial council of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organi zation ended several hours ahead of schedule today.
Petitions signed by 36,796 New Yorkers opposed to the “undeclared war in Indochina” were presented yesterday to the City Clerk in an effort to place the war issue on the November ballot.
SAN JUAN, P. R., July 3—As if Cambodia Vietnam cam pus violence and the limping Dow Jones average were nol enough President Nixon may now have to settle a smolder ing dispute between the United States Navy and the 900 resi dents of Culebra who resen the fact that their otherwise idyllic island is a target for missiles and bombs.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 3 — “If only the Americans would go away, we Vietnamese could settle the war between ourselves.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, July 3 (Agence France‐Presse) Laotian Government forces have reoccupied Phou Kate, a mountain that was seized by the North Vietnamese June 19, an official spokesman of the Laotian Defense Ministry announced today.
BERLIN, July 3 (AP)—The jury at the 20th annual West Berlin Film Festival has dropped from competition West German movie about an alleged American atrocity in Vietnam, authoritative sources reported today.
To the Editor: On the Fourth of July we celebrate the fact that we are a self‐governing people rather than servants paying tribute to some foreign power. It is a special day of thanksgiving for our hard ‐won and hard ‐to ‐hold freedom of thought, speech, press and assembly. We raise our flag as a testimonial symbol of our right to individuality as long as that individuality is not clearly inconsistent with the general welfare or the security of the nation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 3 (AP)—Forty‐six South Vietnamese civilians were killed today when a passenger river boat struck a floating mine south of the demilitarized zone. Local officials said it was the highest toll from such an incident in memory.
WASHINGTON, July 3 —The nation's capital was preparing today for up to 400,000 participants in Honor America Day an event tomorrow dedicated to respect for flag and country on the Fourth of July.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 3 (UPI)—Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, United States military commander in Vietnam, underwent successful surgery in Japan today for the removal of his gall bladder. The surgery had been delayed until now so he could direct the recent United States operation in Cambodia.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 3 — With all United States troops withdrawn from Cambodia, highly placed Cambodians in private conversations are returning to a mood of gloom about the North Vietnamese and Vietcong invasion.
MANILA, July 3—The United States and Thailand clashed here today over the Thais’ bitter attacks on members of the United States Senate and the reluctance of Thailand to provide troops to Cambodia without a United States guarantee to finance them
HONG KONG, July 3 (Reuters) — The North Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Duy Trinh, said today that the appointment of David K. E. Bruce as the new United States negotiator at the Paris peace talks was a “correction” of America's previous attitude toward the negotiations.
WASHINGTON. WHEN President Nixon took office, most Americans hoped that his Administration would find the key to the Vietnam problem. We wanted to end our preoccupation with the war and get on with unfinished national business. Unfortunately, the Administration has not found the key, and the war in Indochina continues to dominate our lives. Having invaded Cambodia in an attempt to score dramatic military gains, the Administration finds itself ever more tightly bound to the war and its consequences. We cannot pry ourselves loose by force of arms, and we cannot dictate the peace.
WASHINGTON, July 4 —With Election Day only four months away, President Nixon's management of the economy is threatening to lessen the Republican party's slim chances of gaining control of the Senate.
WASHINGTON, July 4 (UPI) —Twelve members of the House of Representatives returned today from a trip to Southeast Asia with a bipartisan majority report that the United States incursion into Cambodia had been a military success.
“.... as a result of the success of the Cambodian operations, Secretary Laird has resumed the withdrawal American forces from Vietnam. Fifty thousand of the 150,000 I announced on April 20 will now be out by Oct. 15.
SAIGON South Vietnam, July 4 (Reuters)—South Vietnam has agreed to the appointment of Thoutch Vuttmi as the new Cambodian Ambassador here a Foreign Ministry spokesman said today. The new Ambassador was formerly with the Cambodian Embassy in Peking.
LONDON — It is plain as a pikestaff that Washington is engaged in global diplomatic explorations involving widely separate areas. Apart from the continuing SALT talks in Vienna, which are said to be going well, there are other contacts, both direct and indirect. This may explain why Ambassador Beam returned from Moscow last month for extensive consultations.
Miss Gloria Ann Maccaro, an elementary school teacher in Brookhaven L. I., and 1st Lieut. Brian Jay Carmines, U.S.A.. who recently completed a tour of duty in Vietnam, plan to be married next month.
LONDON, July 4 (Reuters)—Americans around the world celebrated the Fourth of July today with parades, garden parties and embassy receptions. But in several countries observances were marred by anti ‐American demonstrations.
WASHINGTON, July 4—The men and women—and impressively large numbers of young people—who came to “Honor America” at the Lincoln Memorial this morning seemed clearly to be doubters, not militants.
SAIGON — Now that the American portion of the Cambodian war has supposedly ended after two months of operations which President Nixon said “will save American and allied lives in the future,” American casualties can be expected to go down, right? Wrong.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, July 5—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky said last night that United States aid to South, Vietnam had failed to promote long‐range economic development and was used only to patch over short‐term problems.
WASHINGTON, July 5—Fol lowing are the votes of delega tions from New York, New Jer sey and Connecticut on the ma jor roll‐calls in Congress during the week ended yesterday.
HONG KONG, July 5 (Reu ters) — The Vietcong today joined with the North Viet namese in welcoming the ap pointment of David K. E. Bruce as the new chief negotiator at the Paris peace talks, the North Vietnamese press agency re ported in a broadcast heard here.
ON ROUTE 5, Cambodia, July 3—The South Vietnam ese soldiers crouched in the grass on the side of the road, aiming their rifles and a ma chine gun at the Cambodians clustered at a checkpoint only a few feet from them. For more than 10 minutes, the Vietnamese kept their galls trained on the other men.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., July 5—As President Nixon pointed out on television the other night, only history can judge the effectiveness of what he has done in Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 5—The United States and South Vietnam joined today in ap pealing to their allies in the Indochina war to provide urgent aid to Cambodia.
MANILA, July 5 — For the first time since 1966, the Philip pines is not attending the an nual Vietnam allies conference in Saigon.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam Monday, July 6—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky said during the weekend that anti‐Communists in South Vietnam would accept a coalition government with the Communists if it were the re sult of free elections.
BERLIN, July 5 (Reuters)—The Berlin Film Festival was broken off today following a dispute over the jury's opposition to a film showing the rape and mur der of a Vietnamese girl by American soldiers.
South Vietnam and the United States ap pealed yesterday to Thailand, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand to help the Cam bodia regime of Premier Lon Nol. There was no immediate response from the representa tives of those nations meeting in the Allied Nations Ministerial Conference in Saigon. [Page 1, Column 8.]
WASHINGTON, July 5 (AP)—Senator J. W. Ful bright, Democrat of Arkan sas, said today that Vice President Agnew inspired some people to radical actions, and he called Mr. Agnew “'an upstart man.”
Life magazine called on President Nixon yesterday to announce publicly that a total military withdrawal froth Viet nam would be completed by the end of 1971.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6 — The Cambodian For eign Minister, Koun Wick, flew to Saigon from Pnompenh for a hastily arranged visit today at the invitation of Secretary of State William P. Rogers. Dur ing his five‐hour stay he sought to explain his Government's po litical, military and economic problems to allied leaders here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6 — An American who visited South Vietnam's larg est civilian prison last Thurs day reported here today on what he described as the in human conditions and intimi dation existing there.
BERLIN, July 6 (UPI)—Berlin Film Festival officials ruled today that movies still scheduled to be shown would be, even though a dispute over one about Vietnam ended the fes tival competition yesterday two days early.
SAIGON, July 6 (AP)—Secre tary Rogers said today that the level of the Vietnam war had been “reduced” and that this would be reflected in what he called very low American cas ualties for the last week. He said the reduction in casualties was in line with President Nix on's intentions for the two month incursion into Vietnam ese Communist sanctuaries in Cambodia.
HONOLULU. July 6 (UPI)—A five‐day conference to work out the details of the with drawal of 50,000 more Amer ican troops from Vietnam opened‐today at the head quarters of Adm. John S. Mc Cain Jr., commander of United States forces in the Pacific.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6— Koun Wick, Cambodia'sForeign Minister, conferred with Secretary of State Wil liam P. Rogers here today on the unresolved problem of Thai military assistance to Cam bodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6—“If the Government is will ing to give land to the peas ants, why should it not give houses to disabled war 7vet erans?” the former South Vietnamese paratrooper asked bitterly.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 6 (AP)—Cambodian troops re captured the river town of Saang today while other forces beat off an enemy threat against the important highway town of Kompong Thom, 100 miles north, with the aid of South Vietnamese warplanes, the Cambodian command reported.
ATLANTA, July 6 (AP)—The Army announced today that it Would go ahead with a pretrial Iriceeding in the court‐martial of Sgt. Esequiel Torres, 22 years old, of Brownsville, Tex., charged with murder in the al leged Songny massacre.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 6—American discussions with Thailand over the possible dis patch of Thai troops to Cam bodia are reported to have bogged down over Thai de mands that the United States underwrite a large share of the cost.
WASHINGTON, July 6—The Special House committee that returned from two weeks in Vietnam reported today that it had observed “some conditions which required remdial or cor rective action” at the prison on Con Son. It said it had re ceived assurances that the situation would be thoroughly investigated.
Preferential Voting
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 6 (AP)—Prince Norodom Si hanouk's government in exile today rejected as illegal the trial and death sentence im posed on the Prince in absentia by a military court of the Cam bodian Government yesterday. Prince Sihanouk was deposed as Cambodia's chief of state March 18 and has since been in exile in Peking.
WASHINGTON, July 6—A special House committee that just returned from two weeks in Southeast Asia recommend ed today that the withdrawal of United States ground troops continue “at least as fast as now scheduled.”
WASHINGTON, July 6 (AP) — The Democrats announced to day the format of their free time broadcast over the Colum bia Broadcasting System tomor row night amid demands by the Republicans for equal time to reply.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 7 (AP) — Communist troops who have pulled out of part of the ancient temple ruins at Angkor have left them undam aged after an occupation of more than a month, authorita tive sources reported today.
WASHINGTON, July 7—A staff member of a special House committee that toured the war zone in Indochina today termed its report a “whitewash” and said the panel had suppressed significant findings.
WASHINGTON, July 7—The Democratic National Com mittee, opening a novel televi sion assault on President Nixon, laid down the political theme tonight that the Republican Ad ministration was developing “performance gap” between its promises and its deeds.
ANAHEIM, Calif., July 7 (UPI)—A general practitioner has been selling Spiro Agnew wristwatches here for the last few weeks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 7—President Nixon has prom ised the South Vietnamese Government $100‐million to build badly needed housing for its soldiers and their families, President Nguyen Van Thieu disclosed today.
SACRAMENTO, Calif., July 7 —Gov. Ronald Reagan today angrily described as “rid iculous” a statement by a fellow Republican, Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, that the party might turn to Mr. Reagan for its Presidential nominee in 1972 and deny re nomination to President Nixon unless economic conditions im proved and the Vietnam War ended.
Arthur J. Goldberg, the Dem ocratic candidate for Governor, was loudly cheered yesterday at a meeting of his party when he attacked Republican policies and Governor Rockefeller's sup port of them.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 7 (Reuters)—American officials who advise the South Vietnam ese on prison matters were aware of the “tiger cages” that hold about 500 men and women prisoners on Con Son, a United States Embassy spokesman said here tonight.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 7—Economics Minister Pham Kim Ngoc said today that the Government planned to carry out a devaluation of the piaster this summer “in deed, if not in name.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July A (Reuters)—The South Viet namese military command an nounced the start of a new operation in southeastern Cam bodia today.
WASHINGTON, July 8 (Reu ters)—The State Department said today that the United States Government was very concerned about reported pri son conditions at Con Son, an island in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, July 8 (AP) —House leaders decided late today to schedule for tomor row the first test of the Senate imposed limitation on Presiden tial action in Cambodia.
BANGKOK, Thailand, July 8 (AP)—The Thai Government an nounced today the capture of the highest ranking Thai Com munist and said that the ar rest would severely cripple the clandestine Communist move ment in Thailand.
WASHINGTON, July 8—A bipartisan group of 14 Senators filed a complaint today against the three television networks charging that they were being denied an opportunity to pre sent their views against the Administration's policy in Viet nam.

WASHINGTON, July 8 (UP1) —United States District judge John Lewis Smith Jr. said to day he lacked jurisdiction to slop the court‐martial of a Ma rine Corps private accused of killing 16 Vietnamese civilian last February. Pfc. Samuel G. Green. of Clevland, is sched died to go on trial July 20 in Vietnam.
The Conservative party's candidate for United States Senator, James L. Buckley said yesterday that he would back both President Nixon's efforts to win peace in the Middle East and Southeast Asia and his foreign policy in general.
TOKYO, July 8—South Viet nam and Cambodia, and South Korea, Thailand and Philippines as well, have told Secretary of State William P. Rogers that the United States must not re duce its military, political and economic commitments in the Pacific region in any serious way.
SOMEWHERE IN SOUTH VIETNAM, July 5—An Amer ican general and his civilian and military intelligence spe cialists filed into the austere living room of a young Amer ican who is the chief adviser to the local South Vietnamese province chief.
To the Editor: The President has revived the domino theory in his TV inter view by citing as evidence the views of Lee Kuan Yew and Tunku Abdul Rahman. In the past both of those leaders stated very grave reservations about the U.S. intervention in Vietnam and publicly urged far stronger emphasis on peaceful negotiation than we have given.
WASHINGTON, July 9—With the Nixon Administration's sup port, the House leadership thwarted an attempt by anti war Representatives today to force an immediate vote on the Senate's Cooper‐Church amend ment restricting future military operations in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, July 9—Sec retary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that the So viet Union was continuing to deploy intercontinental ballis tic missiles at a rate that would dramatically increase its offen sive nuclear‐striking force.
WASHINGTON, July 9—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, citing budgetary pres sures and the Nixon doctrine, said today that plans had been approved for the removal of some American troops from South Korea.
PEKING, July 9 — Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he felt tempted to call in North Korean troops to help liberate his country. He said premier Kim II Sung urged him recently to accept volunteers.
WASHINGTON, July 9—The United States is trying to persuade the South Vietnamese Government to do away with, the so‐called “tiger cages” at its island prison on Con Son, 140 miles southeast of Saigon.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., July 9—The World Youth Assembly opened today with a plea from Secretary Gen eral Thant for idealistic youth to lead the world away from tension—an appeal that was quickly lost under a blanket of wide‐ranging political at tacks coming mainly from leftist delegations. Youths—some in sport shirts with skimpy beards and a smaller number of women variously attired in African cottons, pants suits or miniskirts moved into the seats of the great domed General Assem bly hall usually reserved for high‐ranking ministers and diplomats. For once, the reg ular delegates, who turned out for the opening of the nine‐day assembly, were seat ed in the rear as silent. On lookers. The youths’ speeches were unpolished, the events were confused and often con tradictory, and the whole af fair for the moment led no where. But for sheer spirit and verve the youths macle the United Nations ’ occasion ally well‐mannered debate seem faintly like a prayer meeting. A small but seem ingly well‐disciplined group of delegates was notably active. Every suggestion to expel groups from South Vietnam, South Korea and Nationalist China was applauded enthusi astically and there were many such motions, mostly from the Eastern Europeans.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9 — The United States Army disclosed today that Maj. Gen. George W. Casey, who di rected the withdrawal of the last American ground troops from Cambodia on June 29, has been missing since Tuesday when he took off in his heli copter. An intensive search is under way, an Army spokesman said.
TOKYO, July 9—Secretary of State William P. Rogers described Communist China today as the key to the future of Indochina and said that peace settlement could be worked out “very quickly” if Peking showed enough interest.
WASHINGTON, July 9—Cor porate shareholders have broad rights to participate in corpo rate decisions that have social impact and any denial of those rights has to he based on clear ly stated reasons, the United States Court of Appeals here has held.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 9—The United States Command reported today that 61 Ameri cans were killed in action in the Indochina war last week, the lowest toll in more than three and a half years.
ST. PAUL, July 9 (AP)—Earl D. Craig, Jr. a black instruc tor at the University of Minne sota and an outspoken critic of the Vietnam war, filed yes terday to oppose former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey for the United States Senate nomination.
AUSTIN, Tex., July 10 (UPI) —S. Sgt. David Mitchell of the Army filed suit today in Federal Court to block the Army from trying him on 31 counts of assault to commit murder in connection with the alleged Songmy massacre and to have charges against him transferred to a civilian court.
Any hope the Administration may have entertained for pursuing a strong proxy fight against the Communists in Cambodia must have been dashed by the responses Secretary of State Rogers has met during his extended Asian tour.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 10 (Reuters) — After an extraordinary conference of South Vietnam's top military and political leaders, President Nguyen Van Thieu called on dissident war veterans today to halt their protests and give the Government time to solve their problems.
WASHINGTON, July 10 —Senator Mike Mansfield, the Democratic leader of the Senate, predicted today that President Nixon would win re‐election in 1972, as things now appear, despite foreign and domestic problems.
When the Most Rev. James Edward Walsh, unshaven and dressed in faded khaki trousers and an old checked shirt, crossed into Hong Kong yesterday, he left behind four Americans still detained in Communist China's prisons.
HANOI, North Vietnam, July 10 (Agence France‐Presse) — A young man introduced as United States marine said at news conference here today that he had left his unit in South Vietnam in February, 1969, and had been with the Vietcong until this month.
WASHINGTON, July 10—The Senate placed on record today, for the second time in less than a month, its wish to repeal the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which was cited by President Lyndon B. Johnson as Congressional authorization for the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, July 10 (UPI) —Eighty‐seven Senators put aside differences on the Indochina war today to demand that Hanoi end “inhumane treatment” of American war prisoners.
Efforts to reassert the authority of Congress in vital decisions concerning war and peace have in the last few days received a double blow in the House of Representatives.
LONDON, July 10 (Reuters) —Secretary of State William P. Rogers arrived here tonight for a two‐day official visit and said his talks with Britain's new Conservative, leaders would center on the Middle East, Indochina and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 10 (Reuters) — The South Vietnamese Government promised today to abolish the ‘'tiger cage” punishment cells in Con Son Prison if an investigation confirmed the criticism of two United States Representatives and press reports of the mistreatment of prisoners.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, July 11 — The United States command announced yesterday that searchers had found the wreckage of the helicopter of Maj. Gen. George W. Casey, the commander of the First Cavalry Division (Airmobile), but withheld most details pending the completion of recovery operations.
PATCHOGUE, L. I., July 10—Paul Adams, the Conservative party candidate for Governor, tonight accused Arthur J. Goldberg, the Democratic candidate, of blocking discussion of important state isues by centering his campaign on the war in Vietnam and the sending of planes to Israel.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 10—Led by Lars Thalen, a strong‐willed Swede wielding a swift gavel, the World Youth Assembly stopped a leftist group's drive today to exclude young participants from Nationalist China, South Korea and South Vietnam.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11—The Green Berets, troops of the United States Special Forces, who were the first American fighting men in this country early in the nineteen sixties, will be phased out of South Vietnam by the end of this year, according to reliable military sources. 
WASHINGTON, July 10— President Nixon had good rea son to be “elated,” as was re ported when he heard that the House had supported him in pre liminary votes on the Cooper Church amendment to restrict future military operations in Cambodia. But there may have been some side effects that will not be so welcome, to him or to those Democratic leaders who apparently worked closely with him to achieve the vic tory. 
THE question of contro versy in art is a can of worms. While con troversy rages, the in trinsic values of the artwork in the spotlight are difficult to discuss because the con troversy tends to rise out of non‐artistic issues which are usually social, political or economic. Was Strauss's “Sa lome” so controversial at its premiere in New York be cause the dissonant score pushed music theory another step past tonality, or was it because the Dance of Seven Veils threatened Victorian morality? Was Pete Seeger prevented from singing all of his anti‐Vietnam war song. “The Big Muddy,” on the now‐defunct CBS‐TV Smoth ers Brothers Comedy Hour a few years ago because the ditty shattered folksong tradi tions or because “the big fool” who said to “push on” in the lyrics was a carica ture of Lyndon Johnson? pushed music theory another step past tonality, or was it because the Dance of Seven Veils threatened Victorian morality? Was Pete Seeger prevented from singing all of his anti‐Vietnam war song. “The Big Muddy,” on the now‐defunct CBS‐TV Smoth ers Brothers Comedy Hour a few years ago because the ditty shattered folksong tradi tions or because “the big fool” who said to “push on” in the lyrics was a carica ture of Lyndon Johnson?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11 (UPI)—The United States command said today that seven bodies had been recovered from the wreckage of a helicopter that had carried Maj. Gen. George William Casey, the commander of the First Cavalry Division (Air mobile). 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11 — Policemen using tear gas broke up a march today by South Vietnamese students and a visiting American delegation here to assess the peace move ment. 
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, July 11 (AP)—First Lieut. James Brian Duffy told an Army court martial here today that he had ordered Specialist 4 John R. La Nasa to execute a Vietnam ese prisoner suspected of be ing a Vietcong. 
British Rule in Ireland
JERUSALEM—“We are not as impressionable as we were back in 1967,” an Israeli official said over the heavy, North‐European unch that officials here offer their guests and that is as little suited to Jerusalem's dazzling climate as the black kaftans of the Hassidim.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11 (AP)—South Vietnamese au thorities sent 62 war prisoners and 24 fishermen back to North Vietnam today. The 86 men were taken in a South Vietnamese Navy vessel to a point six miles off North Viet nam and delivered to two mo torized junks. 
AMERICA'S intellectual elite, nor mally secure from criticism, has been taking some lumps lately—and not just from Spiro Agnew. Writing in The Nation, John McDermott has accused lower‐level members of the elite of thinking of themselves as missionaries bringing culture to the heathens, and Michael Lerner, in The American Scholar, anticipated Agnew with the sugges tion that the intellectual leaders may be snobs. Culture is indeed mission aried at some of the working‐class institutions (state colleges are what I have in mind) at which exiled members of this elite are forced to teach to earn their daily bread, and snobbery is as present among this elite as among other groups of human beings.
Vice President Agnew has acknowledged that his political role in the Administration some times forces him into a “hard line” stance, but he has dis avowed Presidential ambitions for himself. 
WASHINGTON, July 11 — Knowledgable military sources here believe that the Nixon Administration's Vietnam strat egy may require it to keep a large American military con tingent in South Vietnam. roughly 150,000 to 200,000 men, as late as 1972. 
WASHINGTON — As the un seen voter shakes money out of his cookie jar and stuffs it into an envelope to send to the Democratic party in Washing ton, a voice observes: “You don't have to wait until 1972 to vote against Richard Nixon.” 
PRINCETON, N. J., July 11— While many of their fellows are soaking up the summer sun, students at dozens of colleges across the country are already hard at work preparing for po litical campaigns next fall. 
HARTFORD, July 11—The Episcopal Diocese of Connecti cut has called on its member parishes to refuse to partici pate in a fund drive to support, student antiwar strikes. 
BONN, July 11 — The West German Parliament approved today a Government bill to combat inflation through a number of tax measures, includ ing a 10 per cent refundable surcharge on personal and cor poration taxes. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 11 — Allied strategists are planning to use the enemy's own tactic—guerrilla warfare— to try to frustrate North Viet nam's efforts to develop an al ternate supply route for its forces in Cambodia and south ern Darts of South Vietnam. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 11—In a resumption of major military action, the Vietnamese Communists were reported this morning to have entered the strategically situated mountain top resort of Kirirom, about 60 miles southwest of Pnompenh. 
SAN FRANCISCO—City high schools have been in turmoil during the past academic year, and educators have tended to attribute the students unrest al most exclusively to external causes—the Vietnam War, ra cial conflict, permissive child rearing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday. July 13 — A United States helicopter‐borne assault and a B‐52 raid that followed were reported today to have killed at least 384 North Viet namese soldiers and to have wounded many more. American officials termed the action the sharpest setback in months for enemy forces in South Vietnam. 
LONDON, July 12 — Secre tary of State William P. Rogers has concluded during his two‐ week journey in Asia and to Britain that the Communists have no immediate interest in negotiating a peace settlement in Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 12 (AP)—One of three United States newsmen arrested yes terday during a student dem onstration here said today that they had been seized because they were taking pictures of police activities. 
WASHINGTON, July 12 (Reu ters)—Senator Walter F. Mon dale charged tonight that camps tor migratory laborers in Texas and Florida were similar to con crete cages in which political prisoners were held on South Vietnam's Conson Prison Is land. In a speech prepared for Senate delivery tomorrow the Minnesota Democrat said a study “finds the lives of hun dreds of thousands of our fel ow citizens manipulated and managed in such a way as to ?? them to subhuman sta tus. I am shorked and outraged ??eyond belief.” 
BOSTON, July 12 (AP)—A group of women who call them selves Concerned American Mothers plans to go to Wash ington Wednesday to press for an end to the war. A march they plan in front of the White House Friday is scheduled to coincide with a reception for Prince Charles and Princess Anne of Britain. 
LA JOLLA. Calif., July 12— The National Association of Laymen, an organization of 12,000 Roman Catholics, has decided that one of its prime activities this year will be op position to state aid to paro chial schools. 
Senators Back National Health Plan
WASHINGTON, July 12 (AP) —Cyrus S. Eaton, the Cleveland industrialist and longtime advo cate of closer ties with the So viet Union, said today that the famed British soldier, Field Marshal Viscount Montgomery believed “a political end to the war in Vietnam is the only pos sible way to end that war.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 13 — The United States com mand reported today that the number of American troops in, South Vietnam had dropped to 411,500, the lowest in more than three years. 
The Fifth Avenue Peace Parade Committee has filed a suit in Federal Court charging that the Federal Bureau of In vestigation used confidential bank records to obtain informa tion about opponents of the war in Indochina. 
BINHSON HAMLET, Souti Vietnam, July 10—The trouble in Binhson hamlet is all the missing men. They left to join the Vietcong. 
WASHINGTON, July 13— The White House choice for di rector of Volunteers in Service to America is reported to have rejected the appointment be cause of sharp disagreement with President Nixon's Indo china and domestic policies. 
Under belated pressure from the United States Embassy, the South Vietnamese Government has prom ised provisionally to abolish the inhuman “tiger cage” punishment cells uncovered by two unorthodox Con gressional investigators, Representatives Augustus F. Hawkins of California, and William R. Anderson of Tennessee. The two Congressmen departed from an otherwise routine “fact‐finding” junket to visit the prison and expose the “tiger cages” which had been described to them by a former prisoner. 
WASHINGTON, July 13‐ A House watchdog committee today demanded a prompt and thorough Federal investi gation of conditions at South Vietnam's Con Son Prison, where “tiger‐cage imprison ment and savage mistreat ment of human beings” was charged last week by two Representatives who visited the scene. 
COLOMBO, Ceylon, July 13— The Government of Ceylon has extended full diplomatic recog nition to North Korea. Since it came to power in May, the coalition regime of Mrs. Siri mavo Bandaranaike, the Prime Minister, has recognized East Germany and has pledged to establish full relations with North Vietnam and the provi sional revolutionary govern ment of the Vietcong. 
FIRE SUPPORT BASE VEG HEL, South Vietnam, July 13— Gen. William C. Westmoreland, back in Vietnam for the first time since he left two years ago to be Army Chief of Staff, dropped in today at this post near Hue and voiced optimism about the war. 
WASHINGTON, July 13— Two former Government econ omists urged today that the Federal Reserve Board permit a somewhat greater increase in the money supply than was the case in the first half of this year, partly in order to help restore “liquidity” in the economy. 
WASHINGTON, July 13— President Nixon has decided to step up diplomatic relations with the new Cambodian Gov ernment of Premier Lon Nol by naming Emory C. Swank, a senior diplomat, as the first United States Ambassador to Cambodia since 1965. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 13—American intelligence of ficials have turned up evidence of a movement toward South Vietnam by some North Viet namese regiments well north of the demilitarized zone. 
LONDON, July 13 (UPI)— Field Marshal Viscount Mont gomery said today that the United States industrialist, Cy rus S. Eaton, had broken a con fidence in making public a let ter saying President Nixon was “totally unfit to be Commander in Chief of the United States armed forces.” 
WASHINGTON, July 13 (AP) —A citizens committee was set up today to organize grass roots support for a bill to re quire United States withdrawal from Indochina. 
It may well be that the best thing the economy and the stock market have going for them is the prohibitively costly burden of waging war in Indochina. 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., July 13—Youthful participants from South Vietnam and Na tionalist China were denied the right to speak at the World Youth Assembly today, prompt ing 30 delegates from 19 coun tries to walk out in protest. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 14—A battle raged tonight about 55 miles from Pnompenh on the highway linking the cap ital with the port of Kompong Som, the former Sihanoukville. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 14—More than 500 prisoners have been flown on American] military planes from the Con Son Prison to Saigon and are awaiting release, a South Viet namese Government spokesman said here today. 
NEW DELHI, July 14 — Nikolai P. ??ryubin, a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, left this morning after having con ferred with Indian officials about the prospects of a new Indochina conference. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 14—A case of flagrant vote‐rigging has discouraged officials and reinforced the cynicism of villagers in a small province along South. Viet nam's coastline. 
WASHINGTON, July 14 — Apparently yielding to White House pressure, Richard Blumenthal said today that his decision to decline appointment as director of Volunteers in Service to America—VISTA had not been based on dis agreement with Administration policies dealing with the poor. 
GENEVA, July 14 — Red Cross inspectors have found in two visits that conditions at the South Vietnamese prison at Con Son were “not too bad” and that a vast majority of the inmates were held as corn mon criminals, reliable sources disclosed today. 
WASHINGTON, July 14— A House panel that investigated the alleged killing of Viet namese civilians at Songmy recommended today that the jurisdiction of the Federal courts be expanded to deal with military offenders who have be come civilians. 
The old Marxist charge that capitalist economies depend on war to provide prosperity and full employment dies hard. Not only orthodox Communists but radicals of the New Left take it as axiomatic that what used to be known as “mer chants of death” and is now called “the military‐industrial complex” controls the nation's basic foreign and domestic poli cies. The “com plex” does this, according to the Marxist doctrine, not by conspiring against the eco nomic interests of business and labor but by actually serving the interests of those who seek higher profits and wages through the expansion of the capitalist system.
WASHINGTON, July 14 — The newest and most anxious student of South Vietnam's economic problems here is Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, whose interest is aroused by fears of a precipi tate decline in the morale and effectiveness of Saigon's army.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 14—One hundred eighty candidates will vie for 30 of the 60 seats in South Viet nam's Senate, in elections Aug. 30. The central election committee announced the names of the candidates and the tickets on which they are running today, after the filing deadline of midnight last night. 
WASHINGTON, July 14 (AP) —Three junior naval officers have met a setback in efforts to block their early discharge that the Navy acknowledged stemmed in part from their antiwar activities. 
WASHINGTON, July 15 — Members of a House panel that investigated the alleged mass killing of Vietnamese civilians at Songmy stepped up their criticism of the Army today, contending that it had ham pered their investigation. 
PARIS, July 15 — The For eign Ministers of Britain and France agreed here today that the United Nations should make a fresh peacemaking drive in the Middle East, high ly placed diplomats reported. 
WASHINGTON, July 15 — Secretary of State William P. Rogers, in an apparent effort to move his position on Viet nam closer to that of the White House, said today that there were “reasonable pros pects” for the peace negotia tions in the long run but that the short‐run prospects were not bright. 
ATLANTA, July 15 — A three‐judge Federal court was told today that Sgt. Esequiel Torres, accused a murder in Songmy, South Vietnam, could not receive a fair trial in any American military court be cuase President Nixon had al ready declared him guilty. 
Administration Policy
WASHINGTON, July 15 — There can be no peace on the nation's campuses until there is peace in Vietnam, witness after witness told the President's Commission on Campus Unrest today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 15 (AP) — Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, United States com mander in South Vietnam, was released from an Army hospital in Japan today after recovering from a gall bladder operation July 3, his headquarters an nounced. released from an Army hospital in Japan today after recovering from a gall bladder operation July 3, his headquarters an nounced.
WASHINGTON, July 15 — The Nixon Administration an nounced today that it would send to Congress next week a bill to regulate the explosives industry in an attempt to keep dynamite and other high ex plosives out of the hands of terrorists. 
WASHINGTON, July 15 — The Nixon Administration strongly urged Congress today to drop the Senate's Cooper Church amendment restrict ing military action in Cambo dia, on the ground that, if en acted, it would infringe on the President's “lawful responsibil ities” as Commander in Chief. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 15—President Nguyen Van Thieu vowed today to “beat to death” those of his countrymen who called for “immediate peace, in surrender to the Communists.” 
ATHENS, July 15 — Eight Greeks were honored in Athens today for having helped rescue thousands of Jews from Nazi camps, where 62,000 Greek Jews perished during World War II. 
PNOMPEN H. Cambodia, July 15 (Reuters) — A Communist guerrilla force of unknown size was reported today to have struck at Bat Rokar, 28 miles south of Pnompenh, yesterday in an apparent move toward the southern provincial capital of Takeo. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 16 (UPI)—Seventy‐two Ameri cans were killed in Indochina last week, raising United States battle deaths for 1970 beyond 3,000, the United States corn mand reported today. 
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 16 — A denunciation of the United States for its role in Vietnam and what was termed its “rapacious” policy in Latin America was rammed through a World Youth Assembly panel today by a vote of 181 to 73. 
Such difference of opinion as may exist between Secretary of State Rogers and Presidential assistant Henry A. Kissinger over the effect of the Cambodian “incursion” on the prospects for peace in Vietnam less important than need for agreement on a White House policy to get the Paris peace talks moving again. 
WASHINGTON, July 16—Be sides dealing with Russians, Arabs, Israelis and Vietnamese, Secretary of State William P. Rogers is now engaged in periodic negotiations with the White House and, on occasion, even with himself.
WASHINGTON, July 16 (AP) — Vice President Agnew's favorite charities received $25, 000 in donations today as royalties from watches and T shirts bearing caricatures of him. 
BOSTON, July 16 (UPI)—A bill drafting a statewide refer endum question for the Novem ber ballot on future United States military action in Viet nam was passed unanimously tonight by the state Senate and sent to the House. 
WASHINGTON, July 16 (UPI)—One of the two Repre sentatives who drew attention to the tiger‐cage cells at Con Son Prison in South Vietnam made public today a letter charging that inmates were tortured and subjected to other “inhuman practices” at a sec ond orison in Vietnam. 
SAIGON. South Vietnam, July 16—Her only son, a 21 ‐ year ‐ old corporal, was killed in Cambodia on May 29 and the loss makes her tremble and cry out. When Mrs. Dro Huan, a widow who works as a porter in the city of Nhatrang, can afford to take the airplane to Sai gon, it is to see his grave, bring him gifts, and talk aloud to him, as thousands of other Vietnamese Buddhist women have done at other graves. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, July 18 — (AP) Some 1,500 United States marines have joined 5,000 South Vietnamese soldiers in one of two sweeps southwest of Danang in northern South Vietnam, the United States command announced today. 
From the time of the framing of the Constitution it has been the generally accepted view of the American system of checks and balances that “the President proposes, the Congress disposes.” Curiously, for a man who has served in both houses of the legislative branch, President Nixon appears to favor a much narrower interpretation of the role of Congress. 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., July 17—The World Youth As sembly came to a noisy and tumultuous ending tonight after approving a message that re flected the political themes that had dominated and fre quently disrupted its nine‐day session. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 17 — President Nguyen Van Thieu and Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Viet nam visited Cambodia today and met for nearly two hours with Cambodia's three top leaders. 
WASHINGTON, July 17— An American woman doctor said today that she had treated the victims of beatings and tor ture inflicted in a South Viet namese “interrogation center” that had an American adviser. 
Our nonvictory in Vietnam will be easier to accept if we can see it in a meaningful his torical context. Without some sense of background, our ac tivities there seem to go on in a vacuum, for no adequate rea sons, and we fill this void of understanding by bringing in slogans and alleging motives from other times and places. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 17 (Reuters)— About 100 students battled 30 policemen today and recaptured three of their leaders seized during a protest meeting. 
WASHINGTON, July 17—The Justice Department is employ ing the electronic sensors developed to detect enemy movements in South Vietnam in its own war against narcotics smuggling and illegal entries on the Mexican border, a de partment spokesman said to night. 
KREK, Cambodia, July 14— A four‐day tour of South Viet namese positions along the bor der in Cambodia reveals strik ing similarities between the South Vietnamese role here and the role of United States forces in South Vietnam during the first years after the 1965 build up. 
Two Army veterans, double amputees who lost their legs while serving in Vietnam IS months ago, were arrested yes terday along with another man and a woman when six detec tives raided a Brooklyn apart ment and seized 21 kilos of heroin having an estimated re tail value of $5‐million. 
NEW DELHI, July 18—Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, foreign minis ter of the Vietcong's provisional revolutionary government, land ed here today amid a raging controversy over her visit. 
WASHINGTON, July 18 — President Nixon warned Con gress today of “difficult and painful measures” ahead if it persists in running up a budget deficit. 
MONTREAL, July 14 — A group of anti‐Saigon students from South Vietnam have band ed together here to resist Cana dian efforts to return them to their war‐torn homeland. 
point of compromise on the Cooper‐Church amendment it was on the question of provid ing indirect military assistanofie to Cambodia in the form of Thai or Vietnamese troops financed in part by the United States. At one point the Administration indicated that the Cooper‐Church amendment might be acceptable if the so‐called “anti‐mercenary” provision was modified to permit special allowances for “Free World” troops going to the as sistance of Cambodia.
A 12‐hour festival of rock and folk music will be held at Shea Stadium starting at noon on Aug. 6 to raise funds for senatorial and congressional campaigns of candidates who have been strong opponents of the war in Vietnam and sup porters of a reordering of na tional priorities. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 18—A 28‐year‐old village tailor, who can no longer walk or stand up because, he says. he was shackled, beaten and deprived of sufficient food, wa ter, and any exercise or fresh air at Con Son Prison, talked today of his ordeal. 
In an unusual election ploy, New York voters are being urged to support a “coalition ticket” made up of the Con servative candidate for United. States Senator, the Republican candidate for Governor and the Democratic candidate for Con troller. 
TV Time for President
LOUISVILLE, Ky., July 18— Antiwar activists have given up their efforts to keep open a controversial coffeehouse at Muldraugh. Ky., in the middle of the Fort Knox military res ervation. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 18 (UPI)— The South Vietnamese Government con fiscated today's editions of five newspapers, four of them for articles dealing with pris on conditions. 
HARDHATTISM, PRO AND CON
PNOMPENH, Cambodia — The Cambodian Army of 35,000 men had been used mainly to dig ditches and march occasionally in Prince Norodom Sihanouk's pageant—performing both func tions indifferently. Then, four months ago, the armed forces suddenly found themselves faced with the task of defending their country against a battle‐tried in vader.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 18 — Allied forces established new combat base today at Khamduc, an abandoned United States Special Forces camp 13 miles from the Laotian border in northern South Vietnam. 
All of the tragic news today, is not coming from Vietnam, Cambodia or the Middle East. The almost daily reports of the rise in venereal disease to pan demic proportions Is frighten ing. If something isn't done about it, it may well cripple, incapacitate and eventually kill more people than combat. 
BIENHOA, South Vietnam, July 18—A leading South Viet namese general charged today that the leaders of Thailand were shirking their responsibil ity to help defend Cambodia because the United States would not pay them enough money. 
LONGVEK, Cambodia, July 18—The sprawling Cambodian military supply base here, which once nourished the en tire army but now looks more like an auto graveyard, was attacked by the Vietcong and North Vietnamese last night, the night before, the night be fore that and six other nights since June 24. The commander expects to be hit again tomor row and the day after and the day after that.
TEL AVIV, July 19 — Israeli warplanes were reported to have attacked Arab targets on three fronts today, striking the Egyptians in the Suez Canal sector and guerrilla positions in Jordan and Lebanon. All the jets returned safely, the Israeli military spokesman reported. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, July 20—Enemy forces fired two 100‐pound rockets into the heart of Saigon early today, setting off explosions that reverberated throughout the downtown area. 
HELENA, Mont., July 19 (UPI)—Kathy Huppe, the dark‐haired beauty queen who gave up her Miss Mon tana title rather than keep her antiwar views quiet, said today she was glad her short reign was over. 
WASHINGTON, July 19 (AP) —President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam said today that he expected the war in his country to last at least another year but that by the end of 1971 United States troops would oe needed only in supporting roles. He said the supporting role would require more than 50,000 United States soldiers. 
Like the spot on Lady Macbeth's hand, the stain on the conscience of the United States that was left by the slaughter of civilians in Mylai hamlet, South Viet nam, on March 16, 1968, will not go away. 
WASHINGTON, July 20 (AP) —Lieutenant William L. Calley Jr., charged with murder in the alleged Mylai massacre in 1968, asked today for a halt in gen eral court‐martial proceedings against him and dismissal of the charges. 
NEW DELHI, July 20 (UPI)— Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, Foreign Minister of the provisional revo lutionary government of South Vietnam, said today that she was willing to return to the Vietnam peace talks in Paris now that President Nixon has named David K. E. Bruce the United States chief negotiator. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 20 (UPI)—A total of 2,900 American servicemen were withdrawn from South Viet nam last week, the United States command said today. 
WASHINGTON, July 20 — President Nixon today firmly endorsed the opposition of President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam to an im posed coalition government, emphasizing that an election open to all was the best ap proach to a political settlement in Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 20 — The two rockets that crashed into the center of Saigon early this morning made headlines round the world but barely made themselves felt in the minds of the people of this weary city. 
Because of a transmission er ror, a Peking dispatch of The Globe and Mail, Toronto, that appeared in The New York Times of July 10 misquoted Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the deposed Chief of State of Cam bodia. The article should have stated that Prince. Sihanouk said a majority of the members of his “government in exile” felt the job of liberating Cam bodia could still be done by Cambodian resistance forces aided by fighters from North Vietnam, rather than “by Cam bodian resistance fighters from North Vietnam,” as it appeared.
SOMEWHERE IN CAM BODIA—A 32‐year‐old cap tain in the South Vietnamese Army sat outdoors, staring down at his American boots, not up at the moon, while he wondered aloud how much he would mind the loss of an eye, an arm or a leg. 
While they are taking their pictures, I will say this will be on the record for direct quotation. A transcript will be furnished immediately after the confer ence so you will have it for your stories, if you desire it.
WASHINGTON, July 18— Senator George S. McGovern, seeking to meet criticism that he is dovish on the war in Vietnam and hawkish on the Middle East, outlined proposals today for a Middle Eastern settlement, including participa tion of Palestinian refugee or ganizations in Arab ‐ Israeli negotiations. 
Crisis in Universities
NEW DELHI, July 21—The South Vietnamese representa tive in New Delhi asked the Indian Government today to ar rest Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, the foreign minister of the Vietcong provisional revolutionary gov ernment. The demand was rejected. 
WASHINGTON, July 21 (Reu ters)—President Nixon today held a National Security Council meeting on the Indochina war. The Paris peace talks were be lieved to have been on the agenda. David K.E. Bruce, the President's new chief negotiator at the talks, was present. 
WASHINGTON, July 21—An alleged “confidential memo randum” linking Vice President Agnew's office with plans to cancel the 1972 national elec tion and repeal the Bill of Rights was denounced today as a fraud by Mr. Agnew. 

SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 21—The Government an nounced today that it had sus pended the use of the “tiger cage” cells at the prison on Con Son pending improvements. 
It was argued in this space last week that the heavy cost of the Vietnam war, measured in terms of lost output, diminished profits of business, and reduced real wages labor, tends to refute the old Marxist and New Leftist charge that capitalist economies de pend on war to provide pros perity. In response, dissenting readers have made the fol lowing points: ¶Whether the war makes sense for the nation or not, it serves the interests of the powerful military ‐ industrial complex. It is “diversionary” to attribute this view only to Marx ists; it also represents informed non‐Marxist thinking.
NUIDAT, South Vietnam, Wednesday, July 22—(Reuters) —Artillery shells fired by New Zealanders fell around a pla toon of Australian soldiers last night, killing two and wound ing four. 
WASHINGTON, July 21—Rep resentative John E. Moss, chair man of the Foreign Operations subcommittee, urged today that the Red Cross be given full ac cess to all prisons and deten tion centers in Vietnam, North and South. 
NEW DELHI, July 22 (Reu ters)— A Vietcong official said today that some members of the Saigon Government would be acceptable in a coalition Government for South Vietnam. [On the New York Stock Ex change the Dow‐Jones indus trial average gained more than 10 points following the re marks.] 
When President Nixon on July 1 named the new chief negotiator in the Paris peace parleys, he said that Ambassador Bruce would have “great flexibility in the conduct of his talks” except for two conditions. After this week's Presidential news conference, that flexibility appears to have been severely restricted. 
For Welfare Reform
WASHINGTON, July, 22 (AP) — The state of Massachusetts urged the Supreme Court today to rule that the participation of the United States in the Viet nam war is unconstitutional. 
KHAMDUC, South Vietnam, July 20—The allies are back at this former Special Forces airstrip deep in the forested hills southwest of Danang, and are pouring in supplies for a massive operation along the 
Reports that the Vietcong might accept a coalition Gov ernment in South Vietnam had a buoying influence on Ameri can Stock Exchange prices yes terday. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 22 (AP) — The United States Army is trying to get soldiers in Vietnam who use marijuana or other drugs to turn themselves in and get help. It promises that those who do so will not be pun ished. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 22—A 20‐year‐old American soldier was taken into custody here this evening after trying to hijack an Air Vietnam pas senger plane Old force it to take him to Hong Kong. 
The Chase Manhattan Bank was condemned for its finan cial links to South Africa by the National Urban League yesterday as the human rights group closed its 60th annual conference. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, July 23—At least 13 American soldiers have been killed and more than 40 wounded in the last 48 hours around a small hilltop artillery outpost near the Ashau Valley. 
WASHINGTON, July 23 (Reuters)—President Nixon and President Urho Kekkonen of Finland conferred for 90 minutes today on the outlook for a United States‐Soviet agreement on limiting strate gic armaments and proposals for an East‐West conference on European security. 
In a statement that points up one of the most impor tant political issues before the nation, President Nixon has made plain that he intends no significant reduc tions from the present level of defense spending. 
HONOLULU, July 23—The United States has agreed to strengthen South Korea's armed forces and defense indus tries before making any sizable reduction in American troop strength in Korea, but it said today that it would proceed with some withdrawals this year. 
Peace possibilities, both in Vietnam and in the Middle East, apparently fueled a rise on the American Stock Exchange yes terday. The price increases were not broadly dramatic but the index moved up to close at 20.30, up 0.08. 
PARIS, July 23—The Vietnam peace conference went through its 76th plenary session today by marking time. It was consid ered likely to continue doing so at least until the arrival of the new United States delegate, David K. E. Bruce, on Aug. 3 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 23—American airborne troops hastily abandoned a hilltop ar tillery base today just north of the Ashau valley, an enemy stronghold controlling infiltra tion routes from. Laos. The ac tion was taken after heavy bombing strikes and artillery barrages failed to stop a North Vietnamese army build‐up around the post. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 23 (UPI) — Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky said today that the removal of American troops from Vietnam would ease his Government's problems by free ing it from political pressures brought about by “stupid” pacifists in the United States. 
WASHINGTON, July 23—De Tense Secretary Melvin R. Laird said today that draft calls for the rest of 1970 would return to pre‐Vietnam levels of under 10,000 a month. 
WASHINGTON, July 23— Following are excerpts from a memorandum from Dr. Alex ander Heard, chancellor of Vandei‐bilt University, to Pres ident Nixon, summarizing what the temporary adviser to the White House learned about student attitudes to ward the Nixon Administra tion, and from a note on the recommendations of Dr. Heard and a co‐adviser, Dr. James Cheek, president of Howard University, regarding campus unrest: 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., JULY 24 — A 29‐year‐old For eign Service officer has re signed his position on the United Stales delegation, say ing that he could no longer support American policies. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 24 (AP)—United States fighter‐bombers today attacked North Vietnamese positions around an abandoned Ameri can artillery base on a moun tain in the far north and struck repeatedly at the sum mit to destroy anything of value left behind. 
WASHINGTON, July 24— Representatives of the Inter national Red Cross have pro tested the treatment of pris oners of war by the South Vietnamese Government. An inspection report shows that they told Saigon that its treat ment of seven of 24 North Vietnamese soldiers at the Con Son Prison violated the Geneva Convention on pris oners of war. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 16 — Senior American and South Vietnamese planners are concerned over the implications of a very large airfield report ed to be under construction in the southern section of North Vietnam. 
BALTIMORE, July 24 — A Federal judge ruled here today that a West Point graduate who has a “selective conscien tious objection” to the war in Vietnam was not entitled to a discharge from the Army. 
He is a down‐the‐line sup porter of President Nixon's pol icy in Vietnam. He thinks the students were wrong at Kent State. He favors the District of Columbia crime bill, with its provision for preventive deten tion. Next to his name on his campaign literature and bumper stickers is an American flag. 
SAN ANTONIO, Tex., July 24 (AP)—A Federal judge has ordered the Army to discharge a Maryland soldier as a con scientious objector as a result of a Supreme Court ruling. Pvt. John D. Aquilino Jr. of Baltimore had sought a dis charge last May, but Federal District Court Judge Adrian Spears had denied the request. Judge Spears reversed the de cision yesterday, basing his move on a Supreme Court ruling of June 15 holding that personal and philosophical be liefs, as well as religious beliefs applied in conscientious objec tion 
WASHINGTON, July 24 (UPI) —The Army ordered today a general court‐martial for M. Sgt. William E. Higdon, a dec orated 23‐year veteran of mili tary service accused of theft and bribery while in charge of servicemen's clubs in South Vietnam. 
KOMPONG SPEU, Cambodia, July 22—Two days ago when they were captured, Mong Sur, a 21‐year‐old North Vietnamese soldier from Hanoi, and Khieu Horn, a 20‐year‐old Cambodian farmer, both fought on the same side against the Cambo dian Army. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 25 (Reuters) — David K. E. Bruce, the new chief American negotiator at the Paris peace talks spent today in consulta tion with officials at the United States Embassy in preparation for taking up his new post, an embassy spokesman said. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 25—Allied forces reported kill ing 119 North Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers in stepped‐up fighting in South Vietnam today and yesterday, but a lull was reported on Cambodian battle fields. 
WASHINGTON— In almost every important international ne gotiation, certain words come to be endowed with special magic and special menace. They emerge as symbols of the vital political and military stakes each side is fighting for or against. In the Vietnam talks the “code word,” as President Nixon put it last Monday, is coalition. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 25 — Two young Frenchmen held aloft the Vietcong flag from a war statue in down town Saigon today until it was torn down and they were driven from their perch by crowd that pelted the air with stones and then beat them. 
WASHINGTON. July 25—In contrast to recent demonstra tions by construction workers supporting President Nixon's policies in Indochina, a group of New York City area archi tects, engineers and builders who plan the projects the con struction workers build lobbied here this week against those policies. 
Indochina ‘Trap’
WASHINGTON, July 25 (UPI) —A new organization has an nounced a campaign to collect 10 million signatures in sup port of Massachusetts' appeal to the Supreme Court to de clare the Vietnam war uncon stitutional. 
MILLIONS of Americans are deeply concerned about infla tion, student riots, Vietnam, the Black Panthers, strikes, bombings, the specter of Abbie Hoffman and the decline of the stock market. Millions are also concerned about what to them is a problem that seems equally important and far less capable of being solved. This is their golf swing.
LONDON, July 23 (AP)—Sir Alec Douglas‐Home, the British Foreign Secretary, says that both the Egyptians and Israelis are starting to think of nego tiations as their best course. He feels that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization must take account of new Soviet influence south of Europe and must pos sibly consider protection of trade routes around southern Africa.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, July 26—Desertions from the South Vietnamese Army in creased drastically in the last few months, averaging nearly 50 per cent higher than the rate last year, according to in formed South Vietnamese sources. 

SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 26 (AP) — The United Stales Embassy has warned its staff against traveling alone in Saigon because of what it called recent acts of violence against Americans by students or other anti‐Government demonstra tors. 
WASHINGTON, July 26 — Senator John. C. Stennis, chair man of the Senate Armed Serv ices, declared today that he would favor another thrust into Cambodia by United States troops if the Administration found it necessary to clean out enemy sanctuaries there again. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 26—A force of 2,500 South Vietnamese soldiers entered Cambodia today in an operation that initially met only light to moderate opposition. 
CONCORD, N. H., July 27 (AP) —Eugene Daniell 3d, 23‐year‐ old son of Eugene Daniell, the Mayor of Franklin and a Demo cratic Congressional candidate, received a two‐year prison sen tence today for failing to regis ter for induction into military service. Mayor Daniell, who is running on a platform calling for the withdrawal of United States troops from Vietnam by the end of the year, is seeking his party's nomination for the seat held by Representative James C. Cleveland, a Republi can. 
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., July 27—Secretary of Defense Mel vin R. Laird said today that fu ture defense contracts would be negotiated on a “fly before you buy” basis designed to prevent massive losses to taxpayers be cause of cost overruns. 
GENEVA, July 27 (UPI)—The International Committee of the Red Cross said today that it would conduct a new inspection of the Con Son prison in South Vietnam as soon as it received permission from the Saigon Government. Committee spokes men said Red Cross delegates in South Vietnam had formally requested such permission.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 27—Antiwar and anti‐Govern ment members of the National Assembly say that harassment over their views is continual, but their most serious fear is for their political survival. 
PARIS, July 27—Premier Chou En‐lai of Communist China told a French radio and television audience tonight that France and China shared a common opposition to domination and intervention by “the great pow ers” in world affairs. 
OZARK, Ala., July 27 (UPI)— Military officials at Fort Rucker said today that they had can celed the contract of a strike plagued civilian concern that had been training military pilots for duty in Vietnam. 
Protected Textiles
WASHINGTON, July 27 (Reu ters) — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, in testimony before a House subcommittee released today, said that he felt he had authority to permit “short incursions” into Laos. 
NEW DELHI, July 27—Indian officials seemed relieved today that the visit of Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, foreign minister of the Vietcong's provisional revo lutionary government, was over. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, July 28 (AP)—Heavy fighting was reported yesterday around the former resort town of Kirirom in Cambodia, on plateau 50 miles west of Pnom penh. Four Cambodian battal ions that seized the town 11 days ago were said to be sur rounded by enemy troops and the situation was described as serious.
A pipe bomb exploded early yesterday at the entrance of the Bank of America at 41 Broad Street, shattering glass doors and fracturing marble walls leading into the 10‐story build ing in the heart of Manhattan's financial district. 
PARIS, July 28 (Reuters)— North Vietnam charged today that United States B‐52 bomb ers and other aircraft carried out three consecutive days of raids last week on its territory in the northern part of the de militarized zone. Hanoi's dele gation to the Paris peace talks demanded that the American authorities immediately end all acts violating North Vietnam ese sovereignty and security. 
The “military industrial com plex” and the antiwar move ment met head‐on yesterday at the annual meeting of the Bulova Watch Company. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 28—Enemy troops occupied the state cement works at Kampot yesterday after the Cambodian defenders ran out of ammu nition and abandoned the fac tory, the Government military spokesman said today. 
Arming South Africa
WASHINGTON, July 28—The Government announced today that the Federal budget showed a relatively small deficit of $2.9‐ billion in the fiscal year that ended June 30. 
WASHINGTON, July 28 — Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, for mer Under Secretary of State, urged Congress today to repeal the Tonkin Gulf resolution of 1964, which he once described as the “functional equivalent” of a declaration of war in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, July 28 — The Army moved today to hold further investigations of seven officers implicated in the sup pression of information about the alleged mass killing of civil ians two years ago in Songmy, South Vietnam. 
QUANGTRI COMBAT BASE, South Vietnam, July 28—“We planted $17 worth of flowers out there and What have we got—one damn zinnia!” 
DANANG, South Vietnam, July 29 (AP)—A crowd of angry South Vietnamese sur rounded a truck carrying six United States Marines and held it for almost 10 hours until American officials paid nearly $2,500 as compensa tion for a boy killed by the vehicle, reliable sources said today. 
WASHINGTON, July 29 — The Justice Department is in vestigating to determine who originated the rumor that the Nixon Administration was con templating canceling the 1972 elections and repealing the Bill of Rights. 
BROWNSVILLE, Tex., July 29 (UPI)—Sgt. Esiquiel Torres, charged in connection with the Songrny massacre, was found not guilty today of firing a rifle near a Brownsville tavern July 19. The jury deliberated 1 hour 15 minutes following day long testimony. 
WASHINGTON, July 29—One of the most important facts of American political life, just eighteen months after the Nixon Administration took of fice, is that it is now the de fender of the war in Vietnam while the Democratic party has all but officially swung into op position to it. 
GENEVA, July 29 — The In ternational Committee of the Red Cross said today that its representatives who visited the Con Son prison in South Viet nam failed to learn of the ex istence of the so‐called tiger cages. 
ROME, July 29 — Pope Paul VI is planning to issue a spe cial message to youth on the dangers of drug abuse, a sub ject on which President Nix on's special envoy to the Vati can, Henry Cabot Lodge, held long and detailed talks during his first official visit to Rome. 
President Nixon's news conference today, President Thieu's radio‐television address tomorrow and Ambas sador Bruce's projected arrival in Paris Monday could open a new phase in the efforts to negotiate a political settlement of the Vietnam war. Mr. Thieu will clarify his proposals on a cease‐fire in Vietnam, which pre sumably could be laid on the table in Paris next Thursday. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, July 29 (AP)—The United States Navy: turned over five landing craft and a small drydock to the South Vietnamese Navy to day at a ceremony in Danang. The Navy announced that 2,000 of its men had left. Vietnam during July under President Nixon's troop‐withdrawal pro gram. By last Thursday Ameri can Navy strength in Vietnam totaled 24,300 men, but this does not include ships of the Seventh Fleet operating off the coast. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, July 29 — Vietnamese Communist forces have driven Cambodian Government troops from Kiri rom, the hilltop resort that has been the scene of fighting for three weeks. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we've had a slight delay because the audio in the room—I hope that all of you will ask your questions quite loudly. 
PARIS, July 30 — Philip C. Habib ended his tenure as the ranking American at the Viet nam peace talks by telling the enemy today the negotiations “can be successful” if not mis used for propaganda.
WASHINGTON, July 30 — President Nixon tonight sought to assure Israel that she can accept the United States pro posal for a limited cease‐fire in the Middle East “without fear that by entering negotia tions her position may be com promised or jeopardized in that period.”. 
WASHINGTON, July 30—A group of 71 Senators today pub licly endorsed a firm Adminis tration position on the Middle East, asserting that the Soviet Union should be warned of the dangers of provoking the Unit ed States. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 30 — President Nguyen Van Thieu said tonight that “residual force” of about 50, 000 American troops would be required in South Vietnam after 1973 to “guarantee the peace.” 
Proposal for Vietnam
WASHINGTON, July 30 (UPI)—A group of Senators made an effort today to stir national indignation over treat ment of United States prisoners of war, whom they termed the “forgotten men”, of the Viet nam war.
CHICAGO, July 30 — The United States. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit was asked today to reverse the con victions of all defendents in the Chicago conspiracy trial be cause of recently disclosed elec tronic surveillance of Bobby G. Seale. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, July 31 (AP) — The United States command an nounced yesterday that 77 Americans were killed in action in South Vietnam in the week ended Saturday, 11 more than the week before. However, it said the number of American combat dead in the last four weeks, 276, was the lowest in four years. 
WASHINGTON, April 30—In a sharp departure from the pre vious conduct of war in South east Asia, President Nixon an nounced tonight that he was sending United States combat troops into Cambodia for the first time. 
PARIS, April 30—The Saigon delegation at the Vietnam peace conference here declared today that North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces were in troducing large quantities of arms and reinforcements into the Cambodian frontier area in preparation for a new offen sive.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, May 1—The United States sent troops and B‐52 bombers inside Cambodia early today in the first strike of an attempt to crush the sanctuary there of the North Vietnamese and Viet cong forces. 
WASHINGTON, April 30 — President Nixon was reported tonight to have received a gen erally favorable reaction from Congressional leaders to his de cision to send American ground combat troops into Cambodia to destroy Communist sanctu aries in that country. 
WASHINGTON, April 30 Students at American Univer sity here are planning to go on a one‐day strike tomorrow pro testing the Administration's ac tions on Cambodia, the trial of Black Panthers in New Haven, an a recent speech by Vice President Agnew. 
WASHINGTON, April 30—In sometimes emotional debate, the House rejected today ef forts to cut funds for the Safe guard antimissile system. 
COLUMBUS, Ohio, April 30 — National Guardsmen and po lice repeatedly scattered crowds of students on the cam pus of Ohio State University to day, firing hundreds of rounds of tear gas and pepper gas, and discharging shotguns at the youths.
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's televised address last night as recorded by The New York Times:
WASHINGTON, April 30— The White House Press Sec retary, Ronald L. Ziegler, said tonight that the telephone response to the President's address on Cambodia seemed to be running 6 to 1 in the President's favor. 
HONG KONG, April 30 — A major role for Communist China in last weekend's conference of Cambodian, Laotian and Viet inamese Communist and pro Communist leaders was dis closed In official reports reach ing here today from Peking and Hanoi. 
MOSCOW, April 30 —The Soviet Union today condemned the intrusion into Cambodian territory by American‐supported South Vietnamese forces. It called it “direct aggression against a member of the United Nations.”
WASHINGTON, April 30 —President Nixon made no attempt in his speech tonight to expound a legal justifica tion for his move into Cam bodia, other than to refer to his duties as Commander in Chief under the Constitution and the need to protect the lives of American soldiers. 
WASHINGTON, April 30—If you're a little confused about what's going on around here these days, it may be because you haven't caught on to the new rule of politics. The new rule is that logic is out and reverse logic is in, and under this rule everybody talks and acts against his own self‐inter est and in the interest of his opponent. 
Borough President Percy E. Sutton of Manhattan, a delegate of the New Democratic Coali tion, yesterday endorsed Arthur J. Goldberg, the Democratic or ganization designee for Gov ernor. 
President Nixon's assurance in his address last night that his decision to send American troops against Communist sanctuaries in Cambodia will save lives, hasten the withdrawal of American forces and shorten the war has a familiar and wholly unconvincing ring. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 30 — North Vietnamese forces took control of the embattled town of Attopeu in southern Laos early this morning. 
SVAYRIENG, Cambodia, May 1—With a swagger stick under his arm, the beaming South Vietnamese commander of the allied thrust into Cambodia drove into this provincial capi tal at 12:10 P.M. today, em braced the commander of the Cambodian soldiers defending the town and pronounced its residents safe from the Viet cong.
BOSTON, May 1 (AP)—Sen ator Edward M. Kennedy criti ing American cized President Nixon today for sending American troops into Cambodia.
Arthur J. Goldberg charged yesterday that there had been a “virtual breakdown in the process of criminal justice at the trial level” in this country.
CHICAGO, May 1—The econ omy is about halfway through a relatively mild recession that is expected to end in the third or fourth quarter of this year, economist Milton Friedman said today.
WASHINGTON, May 1—A Pentagon spokesman said to day that the allied offensive into the Fishhook area of Cambodia hes been named. “Operation Ultimate Victory” by Saigon's field command ers. He said that other opera tions under the name “Ulti mate Victory”—also trans lated as “Total Victory” or “Complete Victory—had been conducted by the South Vietnamese in recen weeks.
News Analysis
The national antiwar move ment, drained of vigor in recent months, seemed yesterday to have found a new rallying point and an Impetus to renewed pro test in President Nixon's an nouncement of direct interven tion in Cambodia by United States troops.
CHICAGO, May 1—Former President Lyndon B. Johnson appealed to all Americans to night to support President Nix on in the Southeast Asian crisis.
LONDON, May 1—American students are told that they must respect institutions. Their Pres ident deplores “mindless at tacks on all the great institu tions which have been created by free civilizations.”
There is not much point in suggesting now how we might have avoided getting bogged down in Vietnam. But in view of the embarrassment about getting out, perhaps the awareness that another country —apart from the emasculated French empire—has solved the problem can lessen the un thinkability of prompt with drawal.
LONDON, May 1—Surprise and concern were the dominant reactions in Europe today to the American military move into Cambodia.
LANDING ZONE X‐RAY, Cambodia, May 1—A huge al lied task force including, 5,000 American infantrymen swept into Cambodia today and formed an arc around the sus pected headquarters of the Vietnamese Communist forces.
WASHINGTON, May 1— Following are excerpts from a speech opposing United States action in Cambodia, delivered in the Senate today by Mike Mansfield of Mon tana, the majority leader:
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 1 — Premier Lon Nol said today that Cambodia had not been consulted in advance about the American and South Vietnamese military operations on her territory.
The primary season is upon us, focusing today on the kind of fierce internal feud that makes the Demo cratic party of Texas even more suicidal if possible than its counterpart in New York. Ralph W. Yar borough, a dove on Vietnam and one of the few Southern Senators unable to detect Supreme Court qualities in Judge. Carswell, is being challenged by highly conservative ex‐Congressman. Lloyd Bentsen, now a Texas banker and businessman, has the political support of former Governor John Connally and the financial support of the state's oil industry.
WASHINGTON, May 1— President Nixon referred today to some campus radicals who violently oppose his Vietnam policies as “bums” and, in con trast, he said American soldiers were “the greatest.”
PRINCETON, N. J., May 1— An academic delegation of Russians canceled public panel discussions here today, admit ting nervousness that they might be accused of fomenting the protest and strike move ment that broke out at Prince ton University after President Nixon's speech on Cambodia.
JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 1 —North Vietnam, North Korea and Communist China have of ficially declined nvitations by the Indonesian Government to attend a two‐day conference of Asian and Pacific nations on Cambodia in Jakarta on May 16 and 17.
WASHINGTON, May 1—Sen ior military planners today viewed President Nixon's de cision to assault major sanc tuaries in Cambodia as strate gically important and tactically sound.
CAIRO, May 1—President Gamal Abdel Nasser cautioned President Nixon tonight to re frain from delivering more air craft to Israel, warning that such a move would have “dan gerous consequences” to Unit ed States interests in the Arab world for decades to come.
President Nixon's televised explanation of why American troops are crossing the Cambodian border included a long peroration on history, morality and patriotism.
WASHINGTON, May 1 — White House sources offered an expanded account today of President Nixon's decision to send American troops into Cambodia, asserting that it was based almost entirely on esti mates of dangerous enemy, activity in recent days.
GODAUHA, South Vietnam, May 1—Experienced observers both in and outside the Ameri can armed forces are voicing puzzlement over President Nix on's statement last night that American troops near the Cam bodian border have been en dangered by action of enemy troops in Cambodia within the last 10 days.
Following were editorial com ments yesterday on President Nixon's announcement Thurs day night that he was sending United States combat troops into Cambodia for the first time to drive Communists from stag inz zones:
PARIS, May 1—North Viet nam and the Vietcong reacted angrily here today to “the open and impudent American aggres sion” in Cambodia and ap pealed for support of American public opinion and of foreign governments to stay the hand of the “warlike and perfidious” Nixon Administration.
WASHINGTON, May 1—The Senate Foreign Relations Com mittee, moving with intended restraint to challenge the Ad ministration's policy on Cam bodia, took the unusual step today of requesting a confer ence with President Nixon to discuss the American military involvement there.
HONG KONG, May 1—Presi dent Nixon's decision to send American forces into Cambodia was approved today by the United States' Asian allies but encountered varying degrees of criticism in other Asian coun tries.
The Communist party of the United States accused President Nixon yesterday of violating the Constitution and of defying the “expressed will of the American people” in ordering combat troops into Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, May 3—United States and South Vietnamese soldiers have begun a painstaking search of the Fishhook area of Cam bodia amid increasing indica tions that many enemy troops fled in advance of the allied forces' arrival. 
WASHINGTON, May 2—In announcing his decision to ex pand the Indochina war, Presi dent Nixon said he was going “to the heart of the trouble,” and if you accept this as true, it is easy to approve his deci sion. But is it true?
In South Carolina and elsewhere, criminals have been known to receive six years or less for man slaughter. State Circuit Court Judge E. Harry Agnew, in sentencing three owners of a coffeehouse catering to off‐duty soldiers from Fort Jackson, gave them six years for maintaining a “public nuisance.” This was not simply judicial overkill; it was a vindictive sen tence against peaceful antiwar dissent.
CHICAGO, May 2 (UPI)— United States District Court Judge Julius J. Hoffman has taken under advisement a mo tion by Chicago 7 defense at torneys requesting acquittal for the five convicted defendants in the riot conspiracy trial be cause of published reports by one of the jurors. 
Columbia University agreed yesterday to a one‐day mora torium on classes tomorrow to protest President Nixon's deci sion to send American troops into Cambodia. 
PREY TATHOEK, Cambodia, May 1—“I'd like to see the look on Fulbright's face right now,” said a rotund Ameri can lieutenant colonel as he stuck a plug of chewing to bacco into his right jowl. “This is really something, ain't it?” 
While the search for ways to curb the nuclear arms race proceeded with agonizing deliberateness Vienna last week, the two major powers took actions in two sensitive trouble areas of the world that peri lously breached barriers of self‐restraint that have served as a vital safeguard against nuclear war.
WASHINGTON, May 2 —The United States has carried out a heavy bombing raid against supply dumps and other targets north of the demilitarized zone in North Vietnam, well‐placed Administration sources said to day. 
WASHINGTON—The invasion of Cambodia ordered by Presi dent Nixon makes it clear that he does not have and never has had a “plan to end the war.” For this is another of those escalations of the South east Asian war that in every previous case had to be extend ed further than expected and still accomplished nothing.
CHICOPEE, Mass., May 2 (AP) —Two airmen at Westover Air Force Base say they have lamed the Vietnam Moratorium Committee as beneficiary of their $10,000 G.I. life insurance policies. 
WASHINGTON, May 2—Two Democratic leaders in the Sen ate deplored today the newly disclosed bombing of North Vietnam as a step that could enjarge the war and compro mise plans for withdrawal of American troops. 
NEW HAVEN, May 2—Mas sive demonstrations in support of the Black Panthers ended to day with a call for a nation wide student strike, but a small group of white radicals stayed behind and tonight provoked the police into the second tear‐gas attack of the generally peaceful protest weekend. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 2, (AP)—Overshadowed by the allied drive into Cambodia, fighting has raged for three days in South Vietnam's northern most tactical zone, the I Corps area. There has been house‐to house fighting in an important district town and a United States Special camp has been subjected to enemy attacks. 
MANILA, May 2—Foreign Secretary Carlos P. Romulo gave cautious endorsement to day to President Nixon's deci sion to send American troops to destroy enemy refuges inside Cambodia. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 2 — Premier Lon Nol moved closer today to open endorse ment of the American military intervention in Cambodia when he told a foreign visitor that the action represented a posi tive response to Cambodia's appeal for help to restore her neutrality and repel the North Vietnamese and Vietcong in vaders. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 2 —If allied troops catch Pham Hung or any other top enemy leaders at the mystery‐shroud ed headquarters known as the Central Office for South Viet nam during their current sweep across the Cambodian border, analysts of Communist affairs here will be very surprised. 
WASHINGTON, May 2—The White House communications director, Herbert G. Klein, said today that the American peo ple overwhelmingly supported the forays into Cambodia and that the media's emphasis on criticism “gives a misimpres sion.” 
WASHINGTON—The question that disinterested observers car ried in their minds as Richard M. Nixon began last year to come to grips with the Vietnam War was whether, in the end, his polit ical appreciation of the rising discontent in the nation would prove more persuasive than his residual views as a cold warrior and his long‐held convictions about the strategic “necessity” of the war effort.
WASHINGTON—Shortly after the Pentagon announced last week that the United States was supporting a South Vietnamese incursion Into Cambodia, Sena tor Norris Cotton, a conserva tive Republican from New Hampshire, met Senator J. W. Fulbright, chairman of the Sen ate Foreign Relations Commit tee, In a Senate elevator. “Bring that repealer of the Tonkin Gulf Resolution out, Bill,” Senator Cotton said in indignation over the announcement, “and I will vote for it.”
SOUTH BEND, Ind., May 2— Representative Allard K. Lowen stein, Democrat of Nassau Coun ty, L. L, an outspoken opponent of the Vietnam war, has been selected as the 1970 senior class Fellow at the University of Notre Dame. 
Vinh Long is a province in the central delta of South Vietnam. It is bisected, north to south, by the Mangthit Canal, which links the Mekong and Bassac Rivers, the two major delta waterways. This book tells of the failure of a two‐and‐a‐half year campaign to clear the Viet Cong from the banks of the canal so as to reopen it to barges carrying rice to Saigon. 
SAIGON, May 2 (Reuters)— The police used tear gas tonight to disperse students demon strating against the treatment of Vietnamese in Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 2 (AP)—Maj. Gen. Ngu yen Viet Thanh, commander of the South Vietnamese IV Corps tactical zone, which encompasses the Mekong Del ta, was killed today when his helicopter and a United States helicopter gunship col lided over Cambodia, official sources said. 
DURHAM, N, H., May 2—The president of the University of New Hampshire announced to day that three of the defend ants in the Chicago 7 conspira cy trial would be allowed to speak on the Durham campus Tuesday despite opposition from the State House of Repre sentatives. 
The foray last week of Ameri can and South Vietnamese forces into Cambodia is unlikely, in the view of qualified sources, to have in itself more than a transi tory effect on, the course of the war.
PARIS — President Nixon's decision to wipe out the Cam bodian bases of Vietnam Com munists has precipitated the greatest atmosphere of interna tional alarm since the Cuban confrontation. The reasons, however, are largely tangential to Southeast Asia.
To Neutralize Cambodia
MOSCOW, May 2 (UPI)—The Soviet Union today described President Nixon's decision to send United States troops into Cambodia as an “act of undis guised aggression.” 
DISORDER IN THE STREET
PRASAUT, Cambodia, April 30 — South Vietnamese troops who penetrated 19 miles inside Cambodia today to stop at Prasaut—the little town where Cainbudran soldiers killed 89 Vietnamese civilians on April 10 — took a symbolic revenge. 
Two separate public opinion polls yesterday reported con flicting results on the attitude of the American people toward sending United States troops into Cambodia. 
HONG KONG, May 3 — The North Vietnam Government im plied today that United States bombings in two North Viet namese provinces Friday and Saturday might disrupt the Paris peace negotiations on Vietnam. 
Calls for ending classes to allow college students to pro test the widening United States involvement in Southeast Asia were echoed yesterday on cam puses in many parts of the country. 

UNITED NATIONS, N.Y. May 3 (AP) — Secretary General Thant said today that the Viet nam war threatened to engulf Indochina and that he would present “some ideas” to pre vent that from happening.
GODAUHA, South Vietnam, May 3—The three task forces of Lieut. Gen. Do Cao Tri's III South Vietnamese Corps, which moved into the Parrot's Beak area of Cambodia on Wednes day, are now reported to be sweeping back in a semicircle toward the South Vietnamese border, after having reached Svevricng on Friday. 
WASHINGTON, May 3 (UPI) — The Americans for Domo cratic Action voted today to call for amnesty for young men who have gone abroad or to prison to escape the draft be cause of their opposition to the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 3 — The Nixon Administration today de scribed its large bombing raid against targets in North Viet nam as only a continuation of a long‐standing policy of self defense for American forces. 
WASHINGTON, May 3 — Seventy‐five persons, including Dr. Benjamin Spock, were ar rested this afternoon across the street from the White House in a peaceful outdoor prayer service to protest the war in Vietnam and the United States involvement in Cambodia. 
DURHAM, N.H., May 3 (AP) — Mark Wefers, president of the University of New Hamp shire Student Senate, said to day that lawyers would seek an injunction tomorrow to pre vent the college and the board of trustees from interfering in any way with the Tuesday ap pearance of three members of the Chicago 7. The trustees have agreed to allow Abbie Hoffman, Jerry Rubin and Dav id Dellinger to speak on cam pus on condition they leave by 5 P.M., but they are not sched uled to arrive until 4:45 P.M. 
NEW HAVEN, May 3 — A force of 3,000 National Guard troops sent here to control a mass weekend rally in support of the Black Panthers began leaving the city today, and there was a general relaxation of fear as more of the students and young radicals attracted by the rally also departed. 
Dispatch of The Times London
WASHINGTON, May 3 — President Nixon's decision to send troops into Cambodia — and particularly the manner in which it was carried out — has transformed and troubled the spirit of this capital. 
CHROI DANG, Cambodia, May 3 — Vietnamese Commu nist forces were reported today to have attacked and at least partly occupied a key Mekong River crossing point in Cam bodia 35 miles southeast of Pnompenh. 
Provocation (n.): Dispatch of Russian pilots, at Egyptian Government's request, to help defend Egypt against Israeli air attacks. Flying of actual combat mission by So viet pilots over Egyptian ter ritory is a dangerous provo cation.
SATUM, Cambodia, May 3— Penicillin from Britain, surgical instruments from Germany, mortar shells from the Soviet Union and rice from China were the yield of the third day of the allied sweep of the Fish hook area of Cambodia.
The names of Marines killed in Vietnam were read in Bat tery Park yesterday at memorial service sponsored by the Marine Corps Fathers Association.
MOSCOW, May 3 — The chances for a negotiated set tlement in either the Middle East or Southeast Asia—the world's two most inflammatory spots—seem more remote than ever to Western diplomats here. 
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 3—Enemy forces staged widespread attacks, the heaviest in a month, in South Vietnam this weekend. 
State Senator Basil A. Pater son charged yesterday that his opponent for the Democratic nomination for Lieutenant Gov ernor had injected the race is sue into the campaign by mak ing repeated disclaimers that he was seeking white support. 
With terrifying speed all the tragic errors of esca lation are being repeated in Southeast Asia. Once again a President elected on a pledge of extricating the United States from the Vietnamese morass is em barked on a delusive quest for peace through widen ing the war. And each plunge down that road to dis aster is followed posthaste by another and still an other in a dismal replay of the futility ushered in by the initial escalation after Pleiku in February 1965. 
KENT, Ohio, Monday, May 4 —National Guardsmen and the police drove students into their dormitories at Kent State Uni versity ltae last night, the third night of campus unrest. 
Uneasiness over the United States involvement in Cambo dia and the bombing of North Vietnam, plus continuing un certainty about the nation's business outlook, created a mood of deep pessimism on Wall Street yesterday and sent the securities markets into a tailspin.
President Nixon's sudden extension of the Vietnam War into Cambodia, without consent of Congress and against the advice of many members including a major ity of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, brings sharply to the fore a constitutional crisis that has been long in the making.
The presidents of 37 colleges and universities urged President Nixon yesterday to “demon strate unequivocally your de termination” to end promptly the United States military in volvement in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 4—Senior United States military and civilian officials here are beginning to scale down their definitions of suc cess for the four‐day‐old Amer ican‐South Vietnamese sweep into the Fishhook area of Cam bodia.
ALTAMONT, N. Y., May 4 —There is a hesitancy about discussing the war in Vietnam in this little upstate village of 1,500 people. There is, even more, a feeling of futility in even trying to understand what is involved.
LANDING ZONE NORTH ONE, Cambodia, May 4—Sol diers from this northernmost American outpost in the drive against enemy sanctuaries in Cambodia today reached the site of what is believed to be the largest North Vietnamese base area discovered in the operation, which began last Friday.
ROME, May 4—Guests at the opening of an art show at the American Academy here to night found all but a few ex hibits covered with black cloth in a protest against United States military intervention in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, May 4—The Nixon Administration is eager to continue negotiations with the Soviet Union and other Communist countries despite the tensions in Indochina and the Middle East, State Depart ment officials said today.
LANDING ZONE NORTH ONE, Cambodia, May 4—The day after the grunts reached this roadside chunk of jungle they were cracking Cambodia jokes. And some rear‐area types put in an appearance to see if anyone wanted to re‐enlist.
HONG KONG, Tuesday, May 5—The Chinese Communist Government denounced the United States yesterday for sending troops into Cambodia and pledged support for “the three Indochinese peoples.” in their ‘patriotic struggle’ against American forces until complete victory.
WASHINGTON, May 4— The Senate Foreign Relations Committee complained today that the Nixon Administra tion, by sending American troops into Cambodia “with out the consent or knowledge of Congress,” was usurping the war‐making powers of Congress.

MOSCOW, May 4—In this capital where official events are often preceded by ru mors about them, there were no advance hints today that Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin would hold the first news conference by a Soviet head of government here in almost 10 years.
MOSCOW, May 4—Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin today as sailed President Nixon for hav ing sent American forces into Cambodia. He warned that the action might lead to a “further complication” in the interna tional scene and a worsening of Soviet‐American relations.
In the three days immediate ly following President Nixon's television address to the nation last Thursday night on the Cambodian situation, about 100,000 opinion telegrams were sent to Washington, the West ern Union Telegraph Company reported yesterday. The com pany said that about 52,000 telegrams were sent to the President and approximately 48,000 to members of Congress.
MOSCOW, May 3 (UPI)— Following, in translation dis tributed by Tass, the official Soviet press agency, are ex cepts from Premier Alehsei N. Kosygin's statement on the movement of American forces into Cambodia:
KENT, Ohio, May 4—Four students at Kent State Univer sity, two of them women, were shot to death this afternoon by a volley of National Guard gun fire. At least 8 other students were wounded.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, May 5 — Policemen cleared the Vietnam National National Pagoda and the Cam bodian mission building during curfew hours early this morn ing.
WASHINGTON, May 4—Many members of Congress, in both parties, now are reacting to President Nixon's re‐escalation of the Vietnamese war with as much anger as the “doves” used to direct at Lyndon B. John son. One useful but limited re sult is already apparent.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 4—The pressure of North Viet namese and Vietcong troops against Pnompenh increased to day as the Communist forces cut the Pnompenh‐Saigon high way at a point 29 miles from the capital.
A report on the alleged Songmy massacre of Vietnam ese civilians by United States soldiers won the 1970 Pulitzer prize in international reporting yesterday for Seymour Hersh, a free‐lance reporter whose article was circulated through the Dispatch News Service.
PARIS, May 4—North Viet nam reiterated today its threat to walk out of the Paris peace conference as a result of Amer ican military actions in Indo china. But Nguyen Than Le, Hanoi's principal spokesman here, continued in remarks at a news conference to keep the threat vague.
WASHINGTON, May 4—The Defense Department announced today it had “terminated” large scale air raids mounted in recent days against three areas of North Vietnam.
SOMERSET, England, May 4 (AP) — Sir Robert Thompson, a British expert on guerrilla warfare and a special adviser to President Nixon, said today that the United States had no alternative to the thrust into the Fishhook area of Cambodia.
Investor fears over the in tensified war in Indochina sent stock prices spiraling down ward yesterday in the biggest single‐day break since the as sassination of President Ken nedy on Nov. 22. 1963.
Student sentiment in favor of shutting colleges to protest the United States role in Southeast Asia gained strength—and in creasing faculty support—in the New York metropolitan area yesterday.
Meaning of Cambodia
College students across the country stepped up their pro tests, demonstrations and strikes yesterday against widening United States military involve ment in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, (AP) May 5—Tean Ngoc Chau, a National Assembly member and foe of President Nguyen Van Thieu, was convicted un constitutionally by a military court, South Vietnam's Supreme Court ruled today.
SAIGON, South Vietram, May 5 (Reuters) — Soldiers burst into the national pa goda before dawn today and opened fire on about 600 monks, nuns and students oc cupying the building, accord ing to a military spokesman.
BERLIN, May 5—About 20 left‐wing radicals early this morning hurled Molotov cock tails and rocks at Amerika House, the United States cul tural center, in protest against American involvement in Cam bodia. They smashed 22 win dows and the plate‐glass front door.
WASHINGTON, May 5—Pres ident Nixon sought to subdue mounting criticism from Capi tol Hill today by giving Con gressional committees what was described as a “firm com mitment” that American troops would be withdrawn from Cam bodia in three to seven weeks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 6 — United States troops opened a fourth front in eastern Cambodia to day, thrusting across the border at a point 60 miles northwest of Saigon, the United States command announced.
The United States economy is laboring under an inflation that has had damaging effect on consumers' real income, industrial profits and public and business confidence. While the war in Vietnam has not been the sole cause of the inflation, it has certainly inten sified it.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., May 5 — Secretary General Thant made a worldwide ap peal today for an international meeting to seek peace in Indo china.
LONDON, May 5 — Prime Minister Wilson expressed “ap prehension and anxiety” today that the American intervention in Cambodia might go beyond the limits declared by Presi dent Nixon and bring a change in his policy of troop with drawal from Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 5—The Defense Department, which announced yesterday that it had terminated large‐scale air raids against three areas of North Vietnam, said today that a fourth area had also been attacked.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 5 (UPI)—President Nguyen Van Thieu ordered all schools in the Saigon area closed tonight because of unrest among South Vietnamese students.
GENEVA, May 4—Henrik Beer, Secretary General of the League of Red Cross Societies, left today for a 10‐day visit to Saigon. He expects to bring gack the South Vietnam Red Cross Society's estimate of needs for its “prereconstruc tion” program.
WASHINGTON, May 5—In this sensitive and dangerous hour it would probably be a mistake to act on the assump tion that President Nixon is determined on some grand new strategy of smashing his way to victory in Indochina.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia. May 5—While Vietnamese Commu nist forces pushed into within 27 miles of Pnompenh today, the Government called on its troops to hold out 10 more days.
Some 3,500 Columbia Univer sity students attended a rally on campus last night that wound up with a march along Amsterdam Avenue to join stu dents who had occupied the South Campus of City College.
SNOUL, Cambodia, May 5 —“This is a reconnaissance in force to find out what's in there and also, if possible, to take the town—without de stroying it.”
ALEXANDRIA, Va., May 5 (AP)—Norman Mailer, the au thor, started serving a three‐day sentence today for his part in the war protest march on the Pentagon two years ago. Mr. Mailer used the occasion to de nounce President Nixon as the living embodiment of Uriah Heep, a Dickens character known for hypocrisy.
WASHINGTON, May 5— Federal and city authorities acted swiftly today to smooth the way for an antiwar rally scheduled here this Saturday.
Tens of thousands of students in dozens of educational institu tions here and in adjoining states halted their studies yes terday to show their bitterness and anguish over the invasion of Cambodia and the killing of four Kent State University stu dents.
BOSTON, May 5 (AP)—The U.S.S. Boston, the world's first guided missile cruiser was de commissioned today at the Bos ton Naval Shipyard. The Boston recently returned from combat in Vietnam. The ship was in many World War II forays.
WASHINGTON, May 5—There is increasing evidence that Sec retary of State William P. Rogers and Secretary of De fense Melvin R. Laird had seri ous misgivings about the use of American troops in Cambo dia. And there are many indi cations that President Nixon's war decisions in the last two weeks have been reached in an atmosphere of confusion as well as dissension.
New York State Democrats, badly divided in 1968 on the war in Vietnam, united yester day in an unusual drive to press for an end to the United States intervention in Cam bodia.
PARIS—The French Govern ment is convinced that United States entry into Cambodia has —at least for the short‐term future—completely changed the international situation and set back a gradual inching toward political settlements in both the Middle East and Southeast Asia.
HONG KONG, May 6 (Wednesday) (Reuters) The Ha noi radio said today that the United States continued its air attacks on North Vietnam yes terday. A total of 13 planes were shot down in five days of raids, the North Vietnamese press agency said.
MY LAI 4. A Report on the Massacre and Its Aftermath. By Seymour M. Hersh. 210 pages. Random House. $5.95.
WASHINGTON, May 6—It was April, 1954, when Richard Nixon, then Vice President of the United States, first made news by suggesting that Ameri cans make war in Indochina.
PLEIDJERENG, Cambodia, May 6—American and South Vietnamese troops made slow progress today in the second day of their efforts to find and destroy Communist bases in the rugged Se San area of north eastern Cambodia.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 6—“Monsieur,” asked the small Vietnamese woman in perfect French, “do you know the Mai son de France?”
WASHINGTON, May 6—Sec retry of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that he had “supported fully” Presiden Nixon's decision to employ American ground troops agains Vietnamese Communist sanctu aries in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, May 6 —The House of Representatives, in a confused climax to an increas ingly emotional debate on Cam bodia, refused today either to sanction President Nixon's in tervention in Cambodia or to place restrictions on his au thority to undertake military operations in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, May 6 — The nine men and women who overturned furniture and poured blood on files at the Washington offices of the Dow Chemical Company in March, 1969, were sentenced today to jail terms ranging from three months to six years.
College athletes have joined the campus protests against the widening United States military involvement in Southeast Asia. Individual teams at four eastern colleges — Princeton, Columbia, Williams and Dartmouth—have withdrawn from competition and several events have been canceled.
New York University Law School became a focal point yesterday for a coordinated na tional effort to mobilize student and faculty protests against the expanding war in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, May 6—It was obtuse and heartless for President Nixon to say of the dead at Kent State only that “when dissent turns to violence it invites tragedy.” It was in decent for Spiro Agnew to call this awful event “predictable and avoidable,” then to go on with one of his standard de nunciations of students, as if he and the President, pledged as they are to “bring us together,” had not instead done as much as anyone to drive us into con flict. No one has less right than they to “murder the mankind” of these senseless deaths with “grave truths” about violence and dissent.
HONG KONG, May 6—News dispatches from Peking report ed today that Prince Norodom Sihanouk was planning a trip to North Vietnam next week. If he does make the trip he will be leaving Chinese Communist hosts who have lavished atten tion and support upon him re cently.
Demonstrations, protests and boycotts hit at least 20 of the city's 90 public high schools yesterday.
Rogers Welcomes Appeal By Thant for Indochina Talks
PARIS, May 6—North Viet nam and the Vietcong today called off the 66th plenary ses sion of the Vietnam peace talks almost at the last moment.
Demonstrations against the United States advance into Cambodia and in support of American student protests broke out in a number of countries yesterday as fresh antiwar sen timent appeared to be growing abroad.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 6 — Communist China, North Vietnam and North Korea broke diplomatic relations with Cambodia today. At the same time the new Government here agreed to the establishment of relations with South Vietnam in the near future and prepared to abandon its recognition of the Vietcong.
President Nixon's decision to expand the Vietnam war into Cambodia and the killing of four university students by National Guard bullets have produced swelling tide of protest that has united many disparate elements on campuses all over the country.
More than 80 colleges across the country closed their doors yesterday for periods ranging from a day to the remainder of the academic year as thou sands of students joined the growing nationwide campus protest against the war in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, May 6— Despite a more conciliatory at titude by the Justice Depart ment than it has shown in the past, the Government and pro test leaders remained at logger heads today over the plans for the antiwar demonstration scheduled here for Saturday.
Mayor Lindsay assailed Presi dent Nixon's Cambodian policy last night and called for a new “not‐so‐silent majority” of dis senters to move this country to end the war in Indochina.
WASHINGTON, May 6—Al though money market operators, as well as the general public, are understandably skeptical, there is good reason to believe the Government's assurances this time that the foray into Cambodia will have only a neg ligible effect on defense spend ing and hence the Federal budget. The issue of the budget is of major import ance to the future course of the mar ket and interest rates—and hence, indirectly, to the stock market.
Herbert G. Klein, the Nixon Administration's director of communications, is going on a television talk show to explain the Administration's viewpoint on the Cambodian situation.
A dozen well‐known moth ers, including Shirley Mac laine, Shelley Winters and Betsy Palmer, the actresses, called yesterday on women to celebrate Mother's Day by protesting the expansion of the war into Cambodia.
SAN FRANCISCO, May 6 — John Hickel, a son of Secretary of the Interior Walter J. Hickel, plans to join a student strike at the University of San Francisco tomorrow in protest against United States policy in Vietnam.
The tempo of student pro test over United States involve ment in Cambodia and the shootings at Kent State Uni versity quickened yesterday in the metropolitan area, and the scope of demonstrations broad ened, moving off the campus and into the streets as the em phasis shifted from strikes at colleges to activities involving the nonacademic world.
BANGKOK, Thailand, May 6— Some part of Thailand's long border with her eastern neigh Thor, Cambodia, are only 150 miles from the new fighting fronts opened against the Com munists there, but if the Thais are suffering any nervousness about the prospect the war will reach them, they are conceal ing it.
Myth of Supremacy
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 6 — Fresh American combat troops pushed into Cambodia at two new locations today, widening operations there to six fronts and bringing to near ly 50,000 the number of allied troops committed to the Cam bodia forays.
SACRAMENTO, Calif., May 6—Gov. Ronald Reagan ordered today that all 28 University of California and state college campuses be closed for four days in the face of spreading disorders over the killing of four Kent State college stu dents in Ohio and American in volvement in Cambodia.
The Rev. Dr. Donald S. Har rington is planning to with draw as the Liberal party's can didate for Governor and urge the party to endorse a Demo crat.
AFTER the Columbia baseball team voted to cancel its game last Tuesday with Manhattan College, one the players tried to explain his feelings to Kevin DeMarrais, the Columbia sports information director. He had played baseball all his life, the player said, he loved and on this beautiful day there was nothing he would rather do than play: Thus, he felt, the sacrifice was a valid expression for him, it was his way of protesting the ex pansion of the Vietnam War. For the college athlete, protest is very often more costly than for the average student; he must weigh his moral commitments against the goals he may have been training toward for a se mester or a lifetime. At Stanford yesterday, a youth who lost two high school friends in Vietnam cut spring football practice, an act that had meaning only for himself and his chances of making the team. At Princeton, Herman Steven son, the track team cap tain, called for a boycott of Saturday's Heptagonal Games, and at Dartmouth, Steve Tourek, the crew captain, urged oarsmen to wear black headbands in Saturday's Eastern Sprint championships as a symbol of mourning for the Kent State dead. In a letter to rival crew captain. Tourek wrote: “The question should not be to row or not to row but how to make meaningful our feelings. We can accom plish more by competing and by showing our commitment to what is happening in the world divorced from crew.”
WASHINGTON, May 7 — The Senate Democratic lead ership moved today toward a confrontation with President Nixon by pressing for action next week on legislation that would cut off funds for future military activities in Cambodia. 
BOSTON, May 7 (UPI)—The Massachusetts Senate has passed a resolution calling for a state referendum on United States intervention in Cam bodia. The resolution, intro duced by the Senate President, Maurice A. Donohue, Democrat of Holyoke, was adopted on a voice vote yesterday. 
ALL right, what happens to you if you chance to feel that the Parrot's Beak and the Fishhook aren't worth dying for? If you can't quite bring into reasonable approximation the rhetoric of Mr. Nixon and the reality of Southeast Asia? If you choose three to five years in prison instead of killing Vietnamese? As Dr. Willard Gaylin says, “This was a politically volatile subject, war re sistance; in a soci ologically vulner able area, the prisons; conduct ed by a question ably respectable researcher, a psy choanalyst.” Wrong. At least on the last count: Kenneth Keniston, Robert Coles, Rob ert Jay Lifton and, of course, Erik Erikson stack up as a library that— for respectability, intelligence and pertinence—mazes most recent sociology look like comic books written by computers. Dr. Gaylin belongs on their shelf. At some length, over a con siderable period of time, he interviewed young men who refused induction into our armed services; who chose instead to go to jail. In the process, he learned a great deal not only about prisons and the draft, but also about himself. A significant “counter‐transference” occurred, leading him to ask crucial questions about psycho analytic theory and therapeutic practice, as well as the war.
WASHINGTON, May 7 (UPI)—Tricia Nixon met for an hour today with two Finch College war protesters. 
BOSTON, May 7—A former Army officer said today that he had seen lethal nerve gas stored at a United States air base in Bienhoa. South Viet nam, while on duty there in 1967 and 1968. 
ROME, May 7—Pope Paul VI lamented today that these were days “filled with sad events and sadder portents,” and warned against further escalation of in ternational conflicts. 
SVAYRIENG, Cambodia, May 5 — No one here bothers to flick away the cockroaches that, in the thick heat of May, move across sidewalks, walls and ceilings. 
WASHINGTON, May 7— One of the most surprising things about the violent oppo sition in the Congress and the universities to the invasion of Cambodia IS that President Nixon was genuinely surprised by it. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, May 7 (Agency France‐Presse)—North Vietnamese troops in a counter attack today recaptured the key government artillery post at Phou Saphong, a strategic posi tion in southern Laos only three miles from an airfield used by American planes, diplo matic sources said. 
WASHINGTON, May 7—The confidence of just a week ago— euphoria, some called it—is suddenly gone from this capi tal, and in its place there is fear and the anxious activity inspired by fear. There is fear of violence this weekend as tens of thousands of antiwar demonstrators prepare to parade just as close to the White House as nervous offi cialdom will allow. There is fear that the psychological value of that determined show of strength on the Cambodian battlefield is being dispelled by the turmoil on the home front. There is fear of further dissen sion inside the Government— What if Vice President Agnew fails to take the hints to “taper down” the assaults on young people? And there is fear of the political consequences for the Nixon Administration, the Republican party and the na tion as a whole.
The loss of faith by countless thousands of young Americans in their Government will not be easily remedied. More is required than President Nixon's promise yesterday that he and his associates will henceforth refrain from hostile comments on campus Personalities and events. Students deeply concerned about issues of war and human dignity are not likely to be satisfied by reluctant silence or benign neglect.
WASHINGTON, May 7— Evidence mounted today of a drive by Republicans urging telephone calls to the White House to express support for President Nixon's decision to expand the war into Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 7—Official sources said today that a flotilla of South Vietnamese gunboats, many of them with American advisers aboard, is scheduled to begin an assault tomorrow up the Mekong River to the Cambo dian capital of Pnompenh. 
A nationwide effort to get student and faculty delegations to go to Washington to lobby in Congress against the war in Southeast Asia has been started at Columbia and Yale. 
POTTERSVILLE, N. J., May 7—Miss Elaine Deshler, who expects to be graduated this month from Sweet Briar College, plans to be married in September to William Martin Woodson 3d, who served as an Air Force ser geant in Vietnam. 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., May 7—Britain gave strong support here today to Secre tary General Thant's call for conference to end the war in Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam. 
Strikes, demonstrations and occasional violence continued yesterday in the collegiate pro test against the war in Indo china and the fatal shooting of four Kent State University students. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, Friday, May 8 (AP)—Several rockets smashed into Danang early today, killing seven Viet namese and wounding 18. Most of the casualties occurred when three rockets struck a housing area near the center of the city. 
The Columbia University campus was filled yesterday with hundreds of students blocking doorways and chant ing, “On strike! Shut it down!” but there were hundreds of others, both teachers and stu dents, who held classes any way. 
WASHINGTON, May 7—Gov ernment officials privately as sured today the organizers of the antiwar demonstration scheduled here for Saturday that a rally on H Street, sepa rated from the White House by Lafayette Park, would be allowed to go on as long as it remained peaceful.
One of the Administration's chief fiscal officers hinted broadly yesterday that the Fed eral budget would slip into defi cit in the fiscal year beginning July 1, and that higher taxes could well be required to re store it to balance. 
To the Editor: Your editorial on “Congress and the War” (May 5) goes right to the heart of the crisis facing the American Govern ment. 

SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 7 (Reuters) — American casualties in Southeast Asia last week included 123 killed in action, 29 more than the previous week, a military spokesman reported today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 7—Every school in this city is shut. It is yet another sign, after weeks of disturbances, of the chaos that touches the lives of South Vietnamese of all ages.
Track and field captains from the 10 Heptagonal colleges have been asked to ttend a meeting at Yale University tonight to consider the adoption of un fied symbols of protest at the outdoor championships tomor row in New Haven. 
PRAGUE, May 7 (AP)—The Soviet Communist party leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev, predicted today that the United States would achieve no more success with its Cambodian campaign than it has in Vietnam. 
HONG KONG, Friday May 8 (Reuters)—The North Vietnam ese press agency reported today that Cambodian guerril las had killed, wounded or cap tured more than 10,000 “enemy troops” during the last month. 
WASHINGTON, May 7 — Al private group whose members support the war in Indochina handed President Nixon a re port today concluding that the so‐called Vietnamization pro gram was working well, but warning that withdrawals of American troops must be “pru dent and flexible” and closely geared to improvement of South Vietnamese capability. 
THE movement to boycott the commercial aspects of Mother's Day and to turn it into a peace protest snow balled yesterday under the gathering force of antiwar feeling throughout the nation. 
Ruby Dee and Ossie Davis, the black acting and writing team, were awarded the Fred erick Douglass Award by the New York Urban League last night at a dinner at which, the Nixon Administration was scored for attacks on college students. 
WASHINGTON, May 7 — President Nixon moved today on a variety of fronts to repair his lines of communication with the campuses amid fresh evi dence of revolt against his policies within the Administra tion and among his academic advisers. 
WASHINGTON, May 7—De scribing himself as “Mr. Nixon's burn,” Merrick Thomas of Haverford College sat in a Con gressional hearing room today and pondered aloud: “How can we keep the pressure on the President to end this war with out demonstrating, without be ling obnoxious?” 
WASHINGTON, May 7—The Republican Governors Confer ence, scheduled to begin this evening in Santa Fe, N. M., was abruptly canceled this afternoon by its chairman, Gov. Raymond P. Shafer of Pennsylvania. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 8—President Nguyen Van Thieu said tonight that he and Premier Lon Nol of Cambodia had worked out “agreements in principle” for South Vietna mese troops to conduct con tinuing military operations in eastern Cambodia. 
Intruders early yesterday ransacked the Union Square of fices of the New York Student Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam and stole office equipment and card‐index files listing members, accord ing to the police of the East 21st Street station. 
WASHINGTON, May 8—More than 250 State Department and foreign‐aid employes have signed a letter to Secretary of State William P. Rogers criticiz ing the United States military involvement in Cambodia. 
Suddenly, in just about week's time, national trauma has catapulted colleges and uni versities into an active, over riding political role that raises with new urgency the question, “What is a university?” 
MOSCOW, May 8 (Reuters)— The Soviet Communist party chief, Leonid I. Brezhnev, dis cussed the war in Indochina today with the North Vietnam ese party leader, Le Duan, it was officially announced here. The announcement said the two men also discussed measures to strengthen cooperation between Moscow and Hanoi, but gave no details. 
City Hall and the Police De partment received warnings yesterday morning that several hundred construction workers, organized into a band on Thursday, would attack peace demonstrators in lower Man hattan. 
WASHINGTON, May 8 —The Nixon Administration agreed today to permit a mass anti war rally tomorrow on grounds immediately south of the White House, an area it had previous ly declared out of bounds. 
BOISE, Idaho, May 8—Vice President Agnew, delivering a speech tonight, toned down a text that came down hard on America's dissenters, saying he wanted “in some small way” to help cool the temper of the nation. 
It has taken the awful toll of four young lives to create an atmosphere in Washington receptive at last to the voices of youthful protest. But the irony which should not be lost on the campuses of the nation is that it was not the fruitless violence of students that softened the Administration's attitude; it was the vio lence of authority itself—and the nationwide wave of revulsion it created. 
HOT SPRINGS, Va., May 8— John T. Connor, chairman of the board of the Allied Chemi cal Corporation, said today that President Nixon's decision to send United States troops into Cambodia “shakes the confi dence of many Americans in lus judgment and intentions.” 
ROGERS, Ark., May 8—As recently as last fall, the people of this relaxed, conservative, all‐white town were less con cerned about the Vietnam war than about the fortunes of the razorbacks football team at the nearby University of Arkansas. 
WASHINGTON, May 8 — The White House, the focus of tomorrow's antiwar protests, is surrounded by an aura of power plus gates, fences, guards, flood lights and a chain of legal documents designed to keep out intruders and discourage dem onstrations. 
SAIGON, May 8 (AP)—North Vietnamese forces, which launched a series of attacks in the northern reaches of South Vietnam today, were reported to have suffered a defeat in the biggest battle there. 
WASHINGTON, May 8 — A group of Democratic and Re publican Senators have devised a three‐pronged strategy for challenging President Nixon's policies in Southeast Asia and for placing legislative restric tions on his powers as Com mander in Chief. 
Several people complained to The New York Times this week that Western Union operators refused to accept telegrams ad dressed to President Nixon that were sharply critical of his Cambodian policy. 
Demonstrations continued around the world yesterday in protest against the United States' intervention in Cam bodia and the killing of four, students at Kent State Univer sity by Ohio National Guards men. 
At his first news conference in three months, President Nixon said that the first American troops would start pulling out of Cambodia by the middle of next week and all American troops would be out by the middle of June. He said that the Cambodian operation gained time to train the South Vietnamese and thus shortened the United States role. [Page 1, Columns 4–8.] 
MADISON, Wis., May 8— The University of Wisconsin president, Fred Harvey Harring ton, his campus scarred by four days of antiwar strife, today resigned his post, effective Oct. 1. 
NEAR THE TABOL RIVER, Cambodia, May 8—You could trade a case of beer for a Soviet designed rifle around here today, and lots of sol diers were doing it. 
Helmeted construction work ers broke up a student anti war demonstration in Wall Street yesterday, chasing youths through the canyons of the financial district in a wild noontime melee that left about 70 persons injured. 
Many colleges and univer sities, facing long closures dur ing the current wave of cam pus disruptions and strikes have begun offering their stu dents a wide range of improm ise choices to receive academic credit. 
GLEN AUBREY, N.Y., May 7—Mrs. Betty Welch, whose son. Leon, is serving in the Army along the Vietnam‐Cam bodian border, was talking to iday in the local post office about fears for her son's life land the violence on college campuses in behalf of the with drawal of United States troops from Vietnam. 
LONDON, May 8—President Nixon's action in Cambodia has had at least one constructive effect: it has dramatized the flawed character, not to say illogic, of his declared plan to get the United States out of Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, May 8 — Strongly defending the United States troop movement into Cambodia, which has evoked a storm of protest by students and others throughout the coun try, President Nixon said to night that the operation would win six to eight months of time for the further training of South Vietnamese forces and thus shorten the war for the Ameri cans. 
SEOUL, South Korea, May 8 —The South Korean Defense Minister, Nae Hyuk Chung, will visit Saigon later this month to discuss with American and South Vietnamese officials what role South Korea can play in Cambodia, it was reported here today. 
THEN the prestigious Busi ness Council, a group of the nation's top industrialists, invited John Thomas Connor to address its spring meeting yesterday about the situation in Southeast Asia, its mem bers probably could not have anticipated the intensity of his remarks. But by the time that the chairman of Allied Chemical Corporation a n d former Secretary of Commerce end ed his talk in Hot Springs, Va., there was no doubt about his opposition to the movement of American troops into Cambodia and his belief that the Vietnam dis engagement should be quick ened.
A group called the Vietnam War Veterans Against the War, said Yesterday that it woud file a suit against administrators of a Veterans Administration Hos pital here for allegedly for bidding patients from signing Ian antiwar petition.
SAN DIEGO, May 8—“Nixon) says he will be a one‐term Pres ident, and I agree,” said a bar ber in the shabby North Park section of town. “He hasn't lived up to his promises. He said he would get out and bring the troops home, but he hasn't done it.” 
A network of college radio stations, with New York Uni versity's WNYU as the coordi nating flagship, will provide broadcasting's only sustained coverage of today's antiwar activities in Washington and of weekend protests across the country. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, May 8— The Government has begun to take measures to evacuate the civilian population of Saravane following the fall of Attopeu last week. Savarane, with a pop ulation of 5,500, is about 60 miles northeast of the Mekong River town of Pakse and is on the eastern rim of the Boloven Highlands. Attopeu fell to Pa thet Lao guerrillas and North Vietnamese troops on April 30. 
A truck driver who was given a ticket when he re fused to move his delivery van through a street clogged with antiwar demonstrators was rewarded yesterday with the cheers of the demonstra tors—and about $100 in dol lar bills collected from the crowd to Day his fine. 
Theodore W. Kheel, the labor mediator, increased his efforts yesterday to break the dead lock in the contract negotia tions between the printer's union and the city's major newspapers. 
College students across the nation intensified the renewed antiwar movement yesterday with mass marches and rallies, widened school strikes and scattered incidents of violence. 
The assaults by construction workers on students in downtown Manhattan yesterday were a tragic reflection of the polarization brought by the Vietnam war, campus turbulence, racial tensions and an Administration‐fostered mood of political repression. Even more, the clashes in the financial district and at City Hall were a frightening lesson in the ease with which right‐wing vigilantism finds in left‐wing extremism an excuse for pushing aside constituted authority and enforcing its own brutal form of injustice. 
The surge of protest result ing from the United Staes mili tary action in Cambodia and the student deaths at Kent State swept up a growing num ber of New York metropolitan, area residents yesterday, both on and off the campuses. 
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's televised news conference last night, as record ed by The New York Times:
MOSCOW, May 8 — Defense Minister Andrei A. Grechko to day marked the 25th annivers ary of VE day with a denunci ation of the United States and an assertion that if there were a third world war, “imperial ism would be crushed as a world system.” 
WASHINGTON, May 8—Pres ident Nixon told the nation to night that he shared the goals and concerns of student pro testers. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 8—Gunboats of a South Vietnamese Navy flotilla bound for Pnompenh were reported today to have crossed the bor der into Cambodia on the Me kong River while the bulk of the fleet of about 60 river craft appeared to be massing just in side South Vietnam. 
PLEI DJERENG, South Viet nam, May 8 (AP)—The Army said today that it was consid ering court‐martial proceedings against five American soldiers who allegedly refused to partic ipate in a combat assault into Cambodia. [In Saigon, military authorities professed no knowl edge of the incident.] 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 8—Security officials said today that they would welcome a large‐scale effort by the South Vietnamese Navy up the Mekong River to evacuate Vietnamese residents from Pnompenh. 
PRINCETON, N. J., May 9— A majority of Americans, 57 per cent, gave President Nixon a vote of confidence for his handling of the Presidency in a Gallup Poll survey conducted immediately after his April 30 speech in which he announced his decision to send United States troops into Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9 (Reuters)—A Govern ment spokesman announced today that 71 civilians have been killed and 78 wounded in Vietcong attacks in Northern areas of the country since Thursday. 
A few years ago, when the Bronx High School of Science was a sanctuary of placidity amid the city's “blackboard jungle,” teachers there some times boasted of the “worst problems” they had with stu dents: 
WASHINGTON — For all the talk in recent years about re storing the war‐making powers of Congress, nobody, not even the ardent champions of Con gressional authority on the Sen ate Foreign Relations Commit tee, ever really expected that Congress would take any spe cific steps to curb the powers of the President at Commander in‐Chief. 
SAN FRANCISCO, May 9 (AP)—The Army, admitting a technical error, has given an honorable discarge to a lieu tenant who had been court marshialed for refusing to go to Vietnam.
PHUOCVINH, South Viet nam, May 8 —“Troops are just like children, they need praise, to be told when they are doing a good job,” Brig. Gen. Robert M. Shoemaker said here today at the base of the First Cavalry Division (Ai rmobile). 
We believe that President Nixon's recent actions in Indo china constitute a disastrous and indefensible re‐escalation of the war. We do not think that any tactical, short‐term advan tages could possibly justify the catastrophic reversal of Ameri can policy since 1968, and we condemn his reckless disregard of the effects of his futile poli cies abroad on the fabric of our life at home. 
WASHINGTON, May 9.— The White House has paid damned little attention to our report or to working with those who wrote it,” a member of the staff of the National Commis sion on the Causes and Pre vention of Violence asserted recently. 
WASHINGTON, May 9 — Stepping across several white youths sprawled on the grass near the Ellipse, Reginald Wil son, a 19‐year‐old Negro, ex plained the paucity of black participants in the antiwar rally. 
While Police Commissioner Howard R. Leary sat grim faced at his left, Mayor Lind say charged yesterday that New Yorkers had “witnessed breakdown of the police as the barrier between them and wan ton violence” on Friday. 
LONDON, May 9—Five thou sand demonstrators protesting United States involvement in Vietnam marched on the United States Embassy today, struggled with the police, broke several car windows and then went home singing “We'll Meet Again.” 
WASHINGTON, May 9—Rob ert H.Finch, Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, told student demonstrators today that the public rhetoric of Vice President Agnew and Gov. Ron ald Reagan of California had “contributed to heating up the climate in which the Kent State students were killed.” 
ORONO, Me., May 9 — The Flag is back at the top of its tall steel pole today, catching sunlight in a gentle May breeze above the old iron cannon aimed impotently at the Stillwater River from the shady front lawns of the University of Maine's campus here. 
The campus dissension that erupted over the Cambodia is Sve and the Kent State Univer sity slayings led to a new role for university presidents last week as spokesmen for the stu dents in their strained dialogue with the Government. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9 (AP)—The South Vietnamese police today arrested 76 high school and college students who tried to occupy the Ministry of Education building in Saigon. The students were protesting the closing of their schools by the Government and continued detention of student leaders.
A group of executives and editorial employes of many of the nation's leading publishing houses has started a protest movement against the war in Indochina through a sustained campaign and lobbying in Con gress. 
WASHINGTON — During his campaign for the Presidency, Richard Nixon stopped in Dallas one October night and, in a local television interview, offered a preview summary of how foreign policy was to be run under his dispensation.
The Right Rev. Paul Moore Jr. was installed yesterday as coadjutor bishop of the Episco pal Diocese of New York in a two‐hour ceremony in the Ca thedral Church of St. John the Divine.
CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa, May 8—A new sign in the Butterfly Cafe advises those without shoes or shirt to stay out. 
A few days ago, Ivonne Hughes went to a gathering of militant students from the City University of New York and saw a banner reading “John Jay—College or Pig School?” 
WASHINGTON, Sunday, May 10—A great crowd of youths, most from the troubled college campuses across the country, demonstrated peaceably yester day at the rear of a barricaded White House, demanding the withdrawal of United States military forces from Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam. 
Under the pressure of student and other protests, Congressional criticism and a worldwide clamor, Presi dent Nixon now has given the nation new assurances that his Cambodian incursion will remain limited in duration and character and, most important, will not be repeated later. His news conference commitments cannot undo all the disastrous consequences at home and abroad of this ill‐considered adventure, but they do open the possibility of limiting the damage. 
WASHINGTON —They started arriving Friday by car, by bus, by train, by plane—thousands of students streaming into the na tion's capital to protest their Government's policies. The anti war rally this weekend, the larg est mass demonstration in Wash ington since the Vietnam Mora torium last November, climaxed a week of campus strikes, riots and canceled classes at more than 400 colleges across the country. 
WASHINGTON, May 9 — This was protest in search of a method by a crowd that knew what it wanted but not how to get it. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 9—Thirty American gunboats joined with a South Vietnamese flotilla today in a thrust into Cambodia on the Mekong River. 
WASHINGTON, May 9—Most of the war critics in Congress stood detached today from the peace demonstration near the White House. They were look ing to the protest to build up public support for their cause but fearful that it might have the opposite effect. 
The collegiate protest against United States military opera tions in Southeast Asia gener ated rallies and demonstrations in many cities yesterday, but only scattered incidents of vio lence were reporteed. 
WASHINGTON, May 9 — Lawrence F. O'Brien today ac cused the leaders of the Nixon Administration, including the President, of attempting to “divide us as a nation, to polar ize us, and to create anarchy.” 

WASHINGTON—America was a nation in anguish last week, her population divided, her cam puses closed, her capital shaken, her Government confused, her President perplexed. 
SAIGON — It is, of course, precisely what the generals here have always longed for: the chance to sweep through the enemy's sanctuaries in eastern Cambodia and smash them once and for all. But last Friday, the eighth day of the massive allied operation across the border, there was a distinct uneasiness among the military men at the headquarters of the United States command here.
Representatives of student and faculty organizations at 29 universities met here yesterday to plan strategy for electing antiwar candidates to Congress that they hope will provide “a new trend for college students to get back into the electoral process.” 
PARIS, May 9—The refusal of the two Communist dele gations to held the 66th plenary session last Wednesday has created an air of near crisis in the Vietnam peace talks. But it is generally agreed that the only concrete thing ;that any delegate lost by the refusal was the lunch the French hosts serve during the session break. 
NEWTON, Mass., May 9 — State Representative H. James Shea Jr., sponsor of the Massa chusetts legislation designed to test the constitutionality of the war in Vietnam, died of a gun shot wound at his home early today. 
In 19th‐century, manifest destiny‐haunted America the buffalo was clearly an enor mous pest. There were some 40‐million of them thundering about the Western plains, tak ing up perfectly good grazing and farming land. The warlike Plains Indians depended upon them for food and fought fiercely to protect the hunting ground. The Army, anticipat ing the defoliation strategy in Vietnam, did all it could to de‐buffalo the West and starve the Indian out. Further, there was a profit (for a time) to be made from buffalo hides and meat. Obviously a job for the exterminators; and they came and, using long‐range rifles with which a man could leisurely pick off an entire herd, wiped out six million of the animals between 1871 and 1873. By the 1880's the buffalo was on the verge of extinction.
BLAINE, Wash., May 9 (UPI) —About 450 Canadians invaded this border city today to pro test against the Cambodian sit uation but were driven back across the border in a running fist fight with townspeople. One city policeman was in jured. Three persons were ar rested. The invaders shattered several windows in the down town area and pelted rocks at a passing freight train carrying new automobiles. Windows of half of the new cars were broken. 
WASHINGTON, May 9 — As serting that success in the first nine days of the allied military sweep in Cambodia exceeded all expectations, the White House said today that American and South Vietnamese forces had already captured more enemy ammunition than the North Vietnamese and Vietcong had fired in Vietnam in the first four months of this year. 
WASHINGTON, May 9—President Nixon left the White House shortly before dawn this morning, drove to the Lincoln Memorial and spent an hour chatting with young people who had come to pro test his war policies.
BERLIN, May 9—Three per sons were wounded by a police man's bullets during an antiwar demonstration here today when a crowd of militant demonstra tors surged toward Amerika House, the “United States cul tural center in downtown West Berlin, hurling stones and gaso line bombs. Some 5,000 police men battled thousands of leftist radicals for several hours. 
WASHINGTON, May 9—The British Secret Service has an old rule: “Never complain, never explain, never apologize.” That was roughly the line Presi dent Nixon took in his latest news conference: He invaded Cambodia to achieve all the goals the students want, he said, almost as if he had done them a favor. They didn't un derstand, of course, but he would be generous about it. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, May 10—The United States Army's Fourth Division, based near Pleiku, announced today the names of six soldiers who refused to join a combat assault into Cambodia and who are being held pinding possible court‐martial charges. 
WASHINGTON, May 10 — The Under Secretary of State, Elliot L. Richardson, said to day that when the Administra tion decided to send United States troops into Cambodia, it believed the possibility of Chi nese Communist intervention in Indochina was remote enough to constitute an “ac ceptable risk.”
New York policemen are as entitled as anyone else to a presumption of innocence until they are found guilty. But from Mayor Lindsay's angry comments on their failure last Friday to contain marauding con struction workers bent on mayhem, it is clear that some members of the force have a lot to explain.
WASHINGTON, May 10— Everything that happened in Washington this weekend didn't happen in the streets or on television. The public demon stration by the students against the Government's war policies made the news, but on the side there were a lot of private conversations that may prove in the end to be far more important than all the public tumult.
LONDON—Judging by the re action of the educated Briton, the United States faces a crisis of confidence among her friends in Europe. The Cambodian in vasion and its consequences have aggravated the long‐stand ing worry that America, in her obsession with Southeast Asia, will forget Europe. To that has been added a new uneasiness about the predictability and the judgment of the most powerful man in the world, the President.
WASHINGTON, May 10— President Nixon's decision to send American troops into Cambodia and the protests that followed have hurt the Repub lican party's standing with the voters, Republican and Demo cratic politicians agreed this weekend.
MOSCOW, May 10 (Reuters) —Egon Bahr, a West German State Secretary, arrived here tonight to continue exploratory talks about a nonaggression treaty with the Soviet Union.
The faculty‐student senates of Columbia and New York universities jointly confronted New York City members of Congress yesterday with calls for ending the war in South east Asia.
A poll taken last week by Louis Harris reports that 78 per cent of the businessmen questioned believe President Nixon's policies have contrib uted to the decline of the stock market.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 10 — The commander of the South Vietnamese gunboats thrusting into Cambodia said today that the boats would sail up the Mekong River as much as 55 miles past the border of South Vietnam. Military sources reported that the American ad visers aboard the fleet's 110 Vietnamese boats would make the trip with them.
ON THE MEKONG RIVER, in Cambodia, May 10—The stars and stripes and the red and yellow flag of South Vietnam flutter up and down the Mekong River as the Sai gon navy goes about the big gest mission it has ever tackled—bringing back Viet namese refugees from Cam bodia and assuring their se curity in transit. From the South Vietnamese border to the ferry crossing at Neak Luong, 24 miles upstream, the Mekong looks like an arm of South Vietnam rather than the principal waterway of an independent Cambodia. Swift United States and South Vietnamese patrol boats flash up and downstream. Some times a South Vietnamese boat calls a civilian sampan loaded with people over for investigation before permitting it to continue. Not a single Cambodian flag is in sight. Cambodian‐style houses on stilts along the west bank of the river look deserted; the in habitants have fled inland.
The closing of the University of Saigon and of all the city's elementary and secondary schools for an indefinite period adds a poignant footnote, not only to the issues of the war but to the outcry against on America's campuses. The shutdown was ordered by the Thieu Government in answer to a rising tide of student protest against both the war and the Government's often repressive policies. Students Saigon, moreover, appear to agree with those in the United States in viewing the invasion of Cambodia as a postponement of prospects for peace.
CORAL GABLES, Fla., May 10—An unusual University of Miami law class was held here today after a court ordered sus pended university classes re sumed immediately.
To Cut War Budget
The Governor of South Caro lina, Robert E. McNair, talked with a group of New York Democrats for three hours one evening last week in a Central Park West apartment. He came away from meeting with one impression: “They're only in terested in one thing up here, the war—it's different at home and in the rest of the country.”
WASHINGTON, May 10 (UPI) —Three American news corres pondents — two men and a woman—were reported missing today after failing to return from a trip across the Cam bodian border near Svayrieng.
LOS ANGELES, May 10 (AP) —About 1,000 persons—among them Vietnam War veterans, wives of prisoners of war and college students— turned out last night at a dinner to honor H. Ross Perot, the Texas mil lionaire, as “patriot of the year” for his efforts to obtain thenames of prisoners of war being held by Hanoi.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 10 (UPI) — The United States command announced to day that 33 Americans were killed and 30 injured last week as 21 helicopters were lost in the Indochina war.
LOS ANGELES, May 10 (UPI) —The University of Southern California has approved a plan for students to drop out of classes and protest United States policies in Indochina without being penalized aca demically.
WASHINGTON, May 10—In the aftermath of the disorgan ized, almost spontaneous anti war rally here yesterday, plans were being made here and elsewhere for further acts of protest.
KOKI THOM, Cambodia, May 10—A South Vietnamese hell copeter, carrying two generals and an American colonel, landed in a field near this vil lage 30 miles southeast of Pnonmpenh this morning and established the first contact west of the Mekong between South Vietnamese and Cam bodian troops driving toward the river from opposite direc tions.
PARIS, May 10—A throng of Parisians filled a great meadow in the park of Vincennes today to protest the American inter vention in Cambodia. Sharing the platform with Communist and Socialist leaders were Xuan Thuy, head of the Notrh Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace talks, and Vietcong and Cambodian supporters of Prince Novodom Sihanouk.
PHUOCVINH, South Viet nam, May 9—President Nixon's announcement that he intends to begin moving Ameri can troops out of Cambodia by midweek and have most of them out by mid‐June has startled and bewildered field, commanders of the 10:day‐old sweep across the border.
It will be a long time before the full impact of the invasion of Cambodia and the death of four students at Kent State Uni versity can be assessed but it is already clear that student move ments will be deeply affected. The students' role in American politics may be drastically changed.
WASHINGTON, May 10—Six prominent urbanists publicly denounced today the “danger ous” impact of what they called the President's preoccu pation with Southeast Asia on the crisis of the cities.
It is a moving tribute to the continued power of democratic ideas over the nation's students that so many tens of thousands of angry and able‐bodied youths should have assembled in Washington Saturday and practiced peace as well as preaching it. The leaders of the demonstration assisted by raising their voices effectively for moderation, while the numerous young marshals from the ranks of the demonstrators helped snuff out sparks of trouble before they could spread. President Nixon, too, aided the cause of orderly protest by his wise change of tone and rhetoric toward those who dissent from his Cambodia and Vietnam policies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 10—It is the loss of his green bicycle that hurts him the most. For the bicycle was only two years old and not every boy in his school had one as nice. But, like most children of Asia, 13‐year‐old Tran Minh Hoang does not complain.
Inadequate preparations and “inconsistent directives” in the past from the Mayor's office kept the police from stopping attacks on antiwar demonstra tors by construction workers Friday, the Patrolmen's Benevo lent Association charged yester day.
A number of colleges in the metropolitan area — some of which have been threatened with lawsuits by students seek ing to attend classes—will re open today after shutting down because of protests against the war in Southeast Asia and the deaths of four students last week at Kent State University.
MOSCOW, May 10—Amid a rising anti‐American campaign here, Soviet authorities have ordered the postponement of United States Government cultural exhibition that was scheduled to open on Tuesday.
The head of the city's build ing trades unions said yester day that telephone calls and letters received by the unions were 20 to 1 in favor of the construction workers who were involved in a confrontation with antiwar demonstrators here last Friday.
VIENTIANE, Laos, May 11— Premier Souvanna Phouma said today that because of the Cam bodian situation he expected an intensification of the war in Laos by the North Vietnamese and their Laotian allies, the Pathet Lao. He renewed his re cent appeal to the Pathet Lao for serious peace negotiations. 
WASHINGTON, May 11—A group of military reservists who oppose American involvement in the war in Vietnam asked the United States District Court here today to cancel the reserve officer commissions of more han 100 members of Congress. 
George Romney, the Secre tary of Housing and Urban Development, supported Sec retary of the Interior Walter J. Hickel yesterday in his criticism of the Nixon Admin istration's attitude toward the nation's youth. 
WASHINGTON, May 11 — President Nixon conferred today with 45 state and territorial governors to press his search for ways of improving commu nication with the academic com Msiunity and to explain his deci on on Cambodia. 
The Eastern Intercollegiate Tennis and Baseball Associa tions, consisting of the eight Ivy League colleges, Army and Navy, decided yesterday that any team refusing to play a league engagement as a result of current student strikes and protests must forfeit that match. 
Many of the nation's colleges and universities reopened for classes yesterday, but students at 158 institutions were report ed still on strike “indefinitely.” 
KILLEEN, Tex., May 11 (UPI) —Jane Fonda, the actress, was arrested today by a military police lieutenant for trying to disctribute antiwar handbills at Fort Hood. Lieut. John T. Hoff man arrested her at the east gate of the tankers' training center, put her in a military po lice car and drove her to the provost marshal's office, where she was read a letter perma nently barring her from the post. Then she was escorted outside and released. 
SEATTLE, May 11 — The King County Democratic Con vention has refused to endorse Senator Henry M. Jackson for re‐election to his fourth term. 
The leaders of five Police Department organization yes terday accused Mayor Lindsay of “undermining the confi dence of the public in its Po lice Department.”
DETROIT, May 11 — Secre tary of Defense Melvin R. Laird emphasized today that Ameri can troop withdrawals from Cambodia would follow Presi dentn Nixon's schedule despite complaints from officers in the field that all occupied territory might not be searched in time. 
PARIS, May 11 — Xuan Thuy, the chief North Viet namese representative at the Paris peace talks, left for Hanoi today, declaring that settlement could not be reached until President Nixon abandoned “his policy based on a position of strength.” 
WASHINGTON, May 11—In his televised address on the war last Nov. 3, President Nix on declared that a “precipi tate” American withdrawal from South Vietnam” would inevi tably allow the Communists to repeat the massacres which followed their takeover in the north fifteen years before. They then murdered more than 50,000 people and hundreds of thou sands more died in slave labor camps.” 
WASHINGTON, May 11— Over State Department ob jections that Congress was proposing to restrict the Presi dent's constitutional powers as Commander in Chief, the Sen ate Foreign Relations Commit tee approved an amendment today to cut off funds for fu ture American military activi ties in Cambodia. 
HONG KONG, May 11—Le Duan, the head of North Viet nam's Communist party, ar rived in Peking today from Moscow to pursue what was believed here to be a new ef fort to promote unity of ac tion on Indochina by the So viet Union and Communist China. 
NEW DELHI, May 1—Prime Minister Indira Gandhi pleaded with angry members of Parlia ment today to ignore remarks of Vice President Spiro Agnew about Cambodia and the Inter national Control Commission, of which Indira is chairman.
LOS ANGELES, May 10 (AP) —About 1,000 persons—among them Vietnam War veterans, wives of prisoners of war and college students — turned out last night at a dinner to honor H. Ross Perot, the Texas mil lionaire, as “patriot of the year” for his efforts to obtain thenames of prisoners of war being held by Hanoi. 
WASHINGTON, May 11— President Nixon says he is not going to be the first President to lose a war. Before him Presi dent Johnson said the same. This is sports talk. Easy to make fun of, but not so easily disposed of because the notion of war as the ultimate game is a big piece of mental luggage in Atlantic society. 
Several thousand hard‐hatted construction workers and long shoremen, demonstrating in support of the American war, policy in Vietnam, roamed the financial district yesterday, chanting tirades against Mayor Lindsay.
To Mobilize Sanity
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 11 —A national antiwar fund, to which every college professor in the country is being asked to contribute at least one day's salary, was created here today. 
“They say there's going to be a demonstration Tuesday at Wall and Nassau Streets'—and we know that's us,” said a National Park Service ranger after Friday's prowar and anti war battles in front of Federal Hall National Memorial. 
Most colleges and universi ties in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut officially re sumed classes yesterday after a week of protest, but attendance on a number of campuses was marginal as students continued strikes and antiwar activities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 11 (AP)—Six American soldiers are under restriction pending an investigation of charges of refusal to make a combat assault into Cam bodia, a spokesman for the Fourth Inflantry Division said today. They are obtaining le gal counsel, he said. 
WASHINGTON, May 11 — United States officials said to day they saw no reason to re gard the postponement of the opening of an American cul tural exhibition in the Soviet Union as an officially inspired sign of protest against Ameri can military actions in Cam bodia. 
NORTHAMPTON, Mass., May 9 — The no‐strike strike has come to Smith.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 11—Forty‐seven vessels of the South Vietnamese Navy moved up the Mekong River here late this afternoon and tied up in the heart of Pnompenh. 
Policemen in massive force prevented a noonday confron tation on Wall Street yesterday between a thousand antiwar college students and an equal number of construction work ers and longshoremen marching in support of the war and de manding the impeachment of Mayor Lindsay. 
KOMPONG CHAM, Cam bodia, May 12 — Under the cover of a daylong artillery and mortar barrage against the opposite bank of the Mekong River, about 3,500 Vietnamese boarded the boats of a South Vietnamese flotilla today and headed downstream toward Vietnam. 
LO GACH, Cambodia, May 9—This village, the home of 600 Vietnamese Catholics in Buddhist Cambodia this morning, was empty and de serted tonight. 
POCONO MANOR, Pa., May 12—The American Book Pub lishers Council and the Amer ican Educational Publishers Institute, whose members ac count for almost all books published in the United States, have merged into a single trade organization to be known as the Association of American Publishers. 
The State Court of Appeals hi Albany ruled yesterday that law students must complete the specified number of classroom hours and take final examina tions to be eligible for the State Bar examinations. 
Arthur J. Goldberg described modern multi‐million dollar political campaigns as “out rageous” yesterday, then pledged to spend “far less than $2‐million” on his own camnaign for Governor. 
MOSCOW, May 12—The So viet Union appears to have chosen, for the moment, to mask in ambiguity its course of action in both the Middle East and Southeast Asia. Western diplomats have no firm infor Imation on what the sending of Soviet pilots to the United Arab Republic portends nor what, if anything, the Kremlin will do to counter the American troops in Cambodia.
The construction workers, who have so firmly and, in some cases, violently confront ed antiwar demonstrators here, are members of building trades unions that have been tradition ally conservative, strongly anti Communist and unswerving in supporting the Government's war policy in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, May 12— President Nixon gave a sym pathetic audience of labor lead ers a fresh report today on what he called the “enormous success” of American and South Vietnamese military operations in Cambodia. 
NEAK LUONG, Cambodia, May 12 — Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Viet nam said here today that allied naval vessels had begun blockading a 100‐mile stretch of Cambodian coastline to pre vent enemy forces from re supplying their troops by sea. 
WASHINGTON, May 12 — In explaining President Nixon's sudden decision to invade Cam bodia, his foreign policy aides point to three Nixon theories about how to deal with the Communists in general and the Soviet Union in particular. These are worth examining. 
Militant Students
HONG KONG, Wednesday, May 13 (Reuters)—Prince Nor odom Sihanouk, the deposed Cambodian chief of State, has said that forces backing his cause had surrounded Pnom penh and were on the point of taking the city before United States and South Vietnamese troops began their offensive into Cambodia, it was reported today. 
WASHINGTON, May 12—The Senate Republican leadership countered a bipartisan move to cut off funds for future mili tary activities in Cambodia by suggesting legislation today that would sanction actions taken under the President's power as Commander in Chief.
Antiwar demonstrators bat tled the police and the National Guard yesterday at the Uni versity of South Carolina in Co lumbia and at several other col leges around the country. 
HONG KONG, May 12—Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the ousted Chief of State of Cambodia, has asserted in Peking that “patri otic armed forces” loyal to him are dealing “severe blows to the United States invaders of Cam bodia.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 12—Allied officials said to lay that two weeks of opera tions in Cambodia had frag mented the Vietnamese Com munist military and had pushed its major fighting units off bal ance. The officials also said that allied troops had captured enough munitions for a five‐ month enemy attack in South Vietnam. 
Governor Rockefeller de clared yesterday that national issues might well be involved in the gubernatorial cam paign “because they infringe on the life of the state.” 
WASHINGTON, May 12—The Nixon Administration has now reached a critical period of its tenure as it tries to pull the nation, and itself, back together again after a momentous fort night of strain and tumult. In the wake of the outcry over Cambodia and Kent, there is evident throughout the top of the Government strong desire to unite in defense of the Presidency, to guard its powers against dismem berment in Congress and to guard its authority against dis credit abroad. But there are also signs of a new battle for the ear and favor of the Presi dent, a battle that may reopen many of the year‐old argu ments here about the direction of Government, about youth and blacks and civil liberties and economic priorities.
WASHINGTON, May 12 — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that several thousand American troops had already been with drawn from Cambodia and that more would be with drawn this week. Mr. Laird also predicted that all ground combat in Vietnam would be taken over by South Viet namese forces by July, 1971. Some United States ground forces would remain in Viet nam, he said, but they would not be assigned to combat missions. Testifying before the Senate Armed Service Committee, Mr. Laird also said that “the major portion of our forces” will be ?? drawn from Cambodia by June 15. Mr. Laird reiter ated President Nixon's pledge that all American troops would leave Cambodia by the end of June. In answer to a question, Mr. Laird said he would not rule out the further use of American air power in Cambodia to strike at sus pected enemy supply routes. He refused to exclude the pos sibility that South Vietnamese forces might go back into Cam bodia on their own in the fu ture if Communist forces move back into the sanctuary areas.
United States troops or planes will not be used to support the Cambodian Govern ment, Secretary of State William P. Rogers said yesterday, but he said that the United States was encouraging South Vietnam and Thailand to cooperate with the Cambodians against the Communist threat. Mr. Rogers termed this encouragement the essence of the Nixon doctrine. [Page 1, Column 8.]
Harvard's Closing
SAN FRANCISCO, May 13— Secretary of the Interior Walter J. Rickel said today that the nation would have to radically revise its priorities in the years ahead to emphasize livability and eliminate destructive luxu ries.
FIRE BASE BROWN, Cam bodia, May 13—Hunting for enemy arms and supplies is the main mission for Ameri can troops at fire bases like this one, three miles inside Cambodia to the north of Saigon.
WASHINGTON, May 13 — Senator John C. Stennis, chair man of the Senate Armed Serv ices Committee, declared today that there would be “great jubi lation” in Moscow, Peking and Hanoi if the Senate restricted the President's authority to con duct war in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, May 13— The Cambodian crisis is adding a new dimension to the rivalry between Moscow and Peking, in the judgment of United States officials concerned with Communist affairs.
WASHINGTON, May 13— Following are excerpts front a speech that John W. Gard ner, chairman of the National Urban Coalition, was to have given today to the Illinois constitutional Convention at Springfield, Ill. The speech was canceled at the request of the convention officers when the text became avail able in advance.
WASHINGTON, May 13— A Pentagon source, comment ing today on the first with drawals of American troops from Cambodia, suggested that the Sesan area had proved “less productive” than some of the others in terms of supply caches.
WASHINGTON, May 13 (AP)—Twenty‐one welfare mothers and student support ers were arrested tonight after they staged an eight‐ hour sit‐in in the office of Robert H. Finch, Secretary of Health, Education and Wel fare.
WASHINGTON, May 1— Secretary of State William P. Rogers said today that the United States would not become “militarily involved” with troop or air support to defend the Cambodian Government, but was encouraging South Viet nam and Thailand to cooperate with Cambodia in meeting Communist threats.
WASHINGTON, May 13—As the Senate moves toward a vote on limiting military operations in Southeast Asia, a clear dis tinction needs to be made be tween the powers of the Presi dency, on the one hand, and the particular policy of a particular President, on the other. About the first, Congress can do noth ing by statute; about the sec ond, it can do much, if it will.
CHRUI CHANGWAR, Cam bodia, May 13—The South Vietnamese rescue fleet steamed out of Pnompenh across the river from this peninsula today carrying 9.000 Vietnamese to the rela tive safety of South Viet nam. Although the departure brought sadness to many whose home has always been Cambodia there was no grieving.
KANSAS CITY, Mo.—Vietnam war veterans are joining the American Legion and other vet erans organizations in large numbers at a time of wide spread feeling against the war.
Strikes and distrubances over the war in Southeast Asia con tinued across the nation yes terday with mounting involve ment, particularly here in New York City, by groups support ing President Nixon and his Indochina policies.
Arthur J. Goldberg told Columbia University students yesterday that he had opposed a move within the Administra tion of President Lyndon B. Johnson to invade Cambodia in 1966.
VIENTIANE. Laos, May 13 (AP)—North Vietnamese forces, which informants said appar ently had moved in from Cam bodia, are reported to be at tacking Laotian military posi tions on the Bolovens Plateau, a rice‐growing area in southern Laos.
Moe than a thousand high school students have moved their guitars, their posters and their anger into the graduate center of the New School for Social Research. There, for the last week, they have been talk ing, singing, sleeping and eat ing as they coordinate their citywide strike activities pro testing conditions in the high schools, in America generally and in Indochina.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 13—Several companies of American troops withdrew from Cambodia today after only a partial search of a sus pected North Vietnamese base area in the Sesan region of the Central Highlands west of Pleiku.
FIRE BASE BROWN, Cambo dia, May 13—North Vietnamese saboteurs snipped the wires of warning flares and mines this morning and slipped through the barbed wire protecting this exposed American artillery base three miles inside Cam bodia and 95 miles north of Saigon.
WASHINGTON, May 13 — The Illinois Constitutional Con vention refused today to let John W. Gardner deliver a scheduled speech in which he had planned to say that no ad vantage gained by force in Southeast Asia could compare with the damage that the war was inflicting at home.
Howard J. Samuels, one of the two Democrats remaining in the race for Governor, said yesterday that he did not know whether he could support the organization designee, Arthur J. Goldberg, if Mr. Goldberg won the June primary.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 13 (AP)—Maj. Gen. John A. B. Dillard, head of the United States Army Engineer Com mand in South Vietnam, was killed yesterday when the heli copter in which he was flying was shot down, the United States Command announced to day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 13—The Saigon Government's determination to continue and expand its military operations inside Cambodia may well complicate the Nixon Adminis tration's announced goal of withdrawing all American forces from Cambodia by the end of June. In separate remarks during the last few days. President Nguyen Van Thieu and Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky have made unmis takably clear their intention to carry on militarily inside Cam bodia after the deadline for the American withdrawal. For the Nixon Administration, this rais es a basic question: Will it be militarily feasible for the Amer icans to quit Cambodia by July 1 as Mr. Nixon has pledged, if the South Vietnamese insist on operating across the border after that?
Tens of thousands of city high school students continued to stay out of classes yesterday as antiwar demonstrations and other protests took place in and around many schools here.
WASHINGTON, May 13—A bipartisan group of young, liberal political activists an flounced today the formation of an organization to coordinate the lobbying effort for a Con gressional amendment that would withhold funds for mili tary operations in Southeast Asia.
The debate that has opened on the Cooper‐Church amendment now gives the Senate a chance to vote a proposal that would bind President Nixon to his promise of withdrawing American troops from Cam bodia. It would also make sure that he did not send them back without Congressional consent.
WASHINGTON, May 13— Some months ago, after a formal dinner at the White House in honor of Prince Philip, Kingman Brewster, Jr., President of Yale University, encountered a reporter he knew outside the mansion. “I talked to the President and Henry Kissinger [the President's na tional securtiy adviser]” he said. “I tried to get through to them about what's happening on the campuses. I don't think I did. Kissinger was mainly worried about what the right wing would do if we failed to get an honorable settlement in Vietnam.”
LOS ANGELES, May 14— Lyra Halprin was wearing a blue‐and‐white button on her pink, sleeveless dress. It said, simply, “Enough.”
WASHINGTON, May 14—The students who have left the campus to lobby in the Con gress this week obviously thought they were leaving aca demics for politics, but they are caught up now in one of the most difficult intellectual prob lems of American constitutional law: the power to make war.
JACKSON, Miss., Friday, May 15—Two persons were killed and 12 wounded early today after the police opened fire on a women's dormitory at Jackson State College here.
‘Purged’ Scholar
Violence and physical coercion are never acceptable ingredients of political action. Whether lawless forays against free speech and legitimate dissent are carried out by radical students or by angry construction work ers, the appropriate answer is the enforcement of the laws to maintain civic peace, protect civil liberties and prevent physical iniuries.
WASHINGTON, May 14— Fear of campus‐style antiwar demonstrations by off‐duty troops and civilians at major military posts this weekend has forced the cancellation or revi sion of traditional Armed Forces Day ceremonies at bases across the country.
HELSINKI, Finland, May 14 (Reuters)—President Urho Kek konen tonight appointed a new coalition Government, with Teuvo Aura, a Liberal who is Lord Mayor of Helsinki, as Premier.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 14—Military officials an nounced today that 863 South Vietnamese soldiers were killed in battles in South Vietnam and Cambodia last week, the second highest weekly death toll of the war for the South Vietnamese. American losses—168 killed and 1,001 wounded—were the highest in eight months.
SANTA BARBARA, Calif., May 14 (AP)—A 31‐year‐old policeman says an uninten tional shot from his riot gun killed a student peacemaker in antiwar disorders last April at nearby Isla Vista.
BUFFALO, May 14—Gover nor Rockefeller assured stu dents picketing his appearance here today that there could he no repetition of the Kent State University shooting on a New York campus.
WASHINGTON, May 14 — It is clear now that there is a de termined move in the Congress, and particularly in the Senate, to limit the President's war making powers by denying him funds to carry on the Indo china war as he pleases.
The State Education Depart ment said yesterday that Re gents examinations would be given next month as scheduled despite the current antiwar strike by high school students here and their threatened boy cott of the state examinations.
PARIS, May 14—The United States told the Vietnamese Communists today that their “intransigence” at the bargain ing table and heightened activ ity on the battlefield had be come “intolerable.”
DETROIT, May 14—A Soviet proposal that Ford trucks be built in Russia has been re jected, Henry Ford 2d disclosed today. Public criticism, partic ularly by Defense Secretary Melvin R. Laird, was a major influence in the Ford Motor Company's decision, its officials said.
BANAM, Cambodia, May 14 —South Vietnamese marines peacefully occupied this pros perous market town on the (Mekong River yesterday after noon in an operation mainly designed to restore the Cambo dian Government's presence here.
ROCHESTER, May 14—Ar thur J. Goldberg criticized Governor Rockefeller today for alleged inaction and si lence on civil disorders in New York State.
The gloom that enshrouds Wall Street today is perhaps the heaviest since the early days of the Great Depression. The stock market keeps skidding day after day, with only feeble at attempts at recovery, and the bond market is equally de pressed.
WASHINGTON, May 14 — The Administration sent three top officials to the Capitol today to warn Republican Senators that proposed legislation cut ting off funds for future mili tary involvement in Cambodia could impair the credibility abroad of President Nixon.
WASHINGTON, May 14 — The Democratic party moved today to try to mobilize the rising tide of youthful protest behind its candidates for state and Congressional offices.
The nation slides toward isolation in irrationality when politicians at a convention called to draft state's basic law can suppress as irrelevant a carefully reasoned appeal to halt the disintegration of American society. This is precisely what happened when John W. Gardner was barred from telling the Illinois Constitu tional Convention that America is being torn apart by the arowine tendency to tolerate violence.
More than 1,000 New York City lawyers announced yes terday they would stop work next Wednesday to meet legis lative and administration offi cials in Washington to urge “immediate withdrawal from Indochina.”
WASHINGTON, May 13 (AP) — Enemy troops in the Cam bodian sanctuary areas failed to follow a stand‐and‐fight ceder a Pentagon spokesman said to day.
WASHINGTON, May 14— President Nixon told a group of Medal of Honor winners to day that the war in Southeast Asia was often “not under stood and not supported in this country” but that eventu ally the American people would join him in honoring their valor.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 14 — Responsible Cambodian and South Vietnamese sources say privately here that South Vietnamese troops will fight in Cambodia until the defeat of their common enemy — the Vietcong and North Vietna mese.
WASHINGTON, May 14— Concern over a possible Com munist attempt to install the headquarters of the exile re gime of Prince Norodom Siha nouk in Cambodia after the departure of American troops was reported today to be one reason for a growing expecta tion here that South Viet namese forces will stay in Cambodia.
VIFNTIANE, Laos, May 15 (Agence France‐Presse)—A Lao tian Defense Ministry spokes man expressed today the grow ing concern of the military command over the situation in southern Laos and suggested that, from a military point of view, it was necessary that South Vietnamese forces inter vene to help “clean up” Laos.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., May 15—The White House strongly asserted today its view that a move in the Senate to cut off funds for future military in volvement in Cambodia would be an infringement of the Pres ident's constitutional powers as Commander in Chief.
CINCINNATI, May 15 — The Rev. Dr. Roger L. Fredrikson of Sioux Falls, S. D., was un animously elected president of the 1.5‐million‐member Ameri can Baptist Convention here today.
Two members of the Radical Jewish Union of Columbia Uni versity were arrested yesterday after they disrupted services at Temple Emanu‐El to protest the war in Southeast Asia.
WITH TASK FORCE 318 IN CAMBODIA, May 15 (AP)— South Vietnamese forces, bat tling through a tiny hamlet, have discovered the press cre dentials of three American correspondents missing and be lieved captured by the enemy.
LONDON, May 15—In one of the great Supreme Court opin ions on freedom of speech, Mr. Justice Brandeis wrote that those who won America's inde pendence thought “the delib erative forces should prevail over the arbitrary” in society. They wrote into tne tion what they thought would be “the path of safety” for the Republic: “The opportunity to discuss freely supposed griev ances and proposed remedies.” They believed in “the power of reason as applied through pub lic discussion.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, May 16 (UPI)—A force of about 200 North Viet namese infantrymen attacked a United States base inside Cam bodia early today, and field re ports said that five Americans had been killed and 14 wound ed. Eight North Vietnamese were reported killed.
Political activism has flared at Rockefeller University here without igniting the turmoil that has been troubling many other campuses throughout the city and nation.
SARAVANE, Laos, May 15— As the 105‐mm howitzer in the Government military com pound kept firing at the advanc ing North Vietnamese troops, who are now less than four miles away, the frightened res idents of this town in southern Laos appealed yesterday to a group of visitors to help them get evacuated.
Several thousand construction workers, longshoremen and white‐collar workers marched through the financial district yesterday in a clamorous demonstration against Mayor Lindsay.
JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 15 —Although the Asian confer ence on Cambodia does not begin until tomorrow, it already seems destined to be neither a failure nor a success.
WASHINGTON, May 15— Congress is virtually staggering under an avalanche of mail, telegrams and petitions, heavily opposed to use of United States troops in Cambodia.
NEW BRUNSWICK, N. J., —Every day they drive up here from Princeton University—60, 70 and sometimes 100 newly militant students in clean shirts, neckties and slacks to do volunteer work for an anti war Congressional candidate.
WASHINGTON, May 15—The Defense Department extended today the list of military bases across the country at which, tomorrow's traditional Armed Forces Day ceremonies and “open house” visit by civilians have been canceled to avoid confrontations with antiwar protesters.
A meeting between Gov. Wil liam T. Cahill and 200 student leaders from New Jersey cam puses turned into a shouting match yesterday as several stu dents pressed the Governor for answers to questions on the war in Vietnam and the Black Panther party.
BUFFALO, May 15— Howard J. Samuels charged today that his rival for the Democratic nomination for Governor, Ar thur J. Goldberg, was not in volved in the issues of the day and is the candidate of the old politics.
A concert to benefit Vietna mese children wounded and or phaned by the war in Vietnam will be presented at the Ethical Culture Society on May 26 at 8:30; P.M. by Richard Goode, pianist, with members of the Casals Festival Orchestra and the City Center Opera Orches tra. The program will he de voted to chamber music by Beethoven, including the Quin tet for Piano and Winds (Op. 16) and the Septet in E flat (Op. 20). Tickets can he ob tained from the American Friends Service Committee, 15 Rutherford Palce, New York, 10003.
Role for Mayor
WASHINGTON, May 15—The United States publicly en couraged South Vietnam and Cambodia today to produce a joint plan for the defense of the regime of Premier Lon Nol in Pnompenh from Com munist attacks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 15 (AP) — Vice Adm. Jerome H. King Jr. assumed command of United States naval forces in Vietnam today from Vice Adm. Elmo R. Zum walt Jr., who will become Chief of Naval Operations on July 1. Gen. Creighton W. Ab rams, commander of Unite States forces in Vietnam, pre sented Admiral Zumwalt with the Navy Distinguished Service Medal and the Navy Unit Com mendation.
ATHENS, Ohio, May 15 — Ohio University was closed at 3:10 o'clock this morning.
WASHINGTON, May 16 (UPI) —One of the 82 Army colonels nominated for promotion to brigadier general yesterday was killed in a helicopter crash in Vietnam last Tuesday. He was Col. Carroll E. Adams Jr., 46 years old, of Pawtucket, R. I. Colonel Adams was com manding the 937th Engineer Group when he and nine others, including Maj. Gen. John A. Dillard, died in the crash. 
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., May 16—The White House said to day that it had every reason to believe that South Vietnam would withdraw its combat forces from Cambodia around July 1, the date given for the completion of the pullout of all American troops. 
Activity in the over‐the counter market and on the American Stock Exchange has virtually dried up in re sponse to investor fears that the Vietnam war will not be over as soon as expected, the nation will become embroiled the Middle East conflict and the economy is in trouble. 
CANNES, France. IF and when the world ends, I wouldn't be at all surprised if there weren't at least two or three American movie companies willing to bid for the distri bution rights, on the outside chance that the cataclysm might turn out to be a good show, as well as something less than total. One of the most impressive things about the just‐ended 23d Inter national Cannes Film Festival was the apparent enthusiasm of American film people to merchandise national disas ter. Sometimes this was simply a coincidence, as when Stuart Hagmann's “The Strawberry Statement,” a drama of campus unrest that has a brutal police riot as its climax, was shown here the day after the news came in from Kent, Ohio. Sometimes it seemed more self‐conscious, more self‐serving. The direc tor of “Woodstock,” Michael Wadleigh, a handsome young man who wears his hair in a long, Christ‐like bob, and his associates passed out black arm bands at the screening of their film, which they an nounced was being dedicated to the four students “who were killed by U.S. troops while manifesting their oppo sition to the Vietnam and Cambodian wars.” Unfortu nately, this gesture, no mat ter how sincere, followed a lot of conventional, high pressure publicity organized on behalf of the film by War ner Brothers, the distributor, and thus suggested oppor tunism, at least to members of the press corps. Warners had celebrated the film's ap pearance here by, among other things, passing out “Wood stock” headbands and lapel pins (the sort of things that are printed to order on 42d Street), bringing in a couple of bus loads of American students from Aix‐en‐Pro vence to carry antiwar ban ners in a small “manifesta tion,” by staging a rock con cert on the beach and by throwing a hippie‐style party that had, I'm told; a couple of the most elegant of the local couturiers working overtime. “I think,” said one French producer, “that War ners did everything but plant a bomb in the festival palace.”
OBERLIN, Ohio, May 14 — The corridors of Wilder Hall ere plastered with notices, pos ters, petitions and newspaper clippings, and the tired looking students pause to check them as they go to and from inter minable meetings and discus sions. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 16—The United States military command announced today the end of one of its operations in Cambodia and the return to South Vietnam of final elements of the 5,500 troops involved.
HONG KONG. May 16—Re cent developments appear to have left the Soviet Union more than ever an outsider in Indo china. 
WASHINGTON—This capital is more divided and more pes simistic today than at any time since the beginning of the Viet nam war. 
WASHINGTON, May 16— Former Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford has accused President Nixon of “reckless” action in sending combat troops into Cambodia and of continu ing to give priority to Indo china policies while ignoring their consequences at home. 
ITHACA, N. Y., May 16— Governor Rockefeller today called on students at all college campuses in the state to elect representatives to a “perma nent clearinghouse of ideas” that would provide the students with a direct link to him, and through him to tire President. 
WASHINGTON, May 16—For all their constitutional differ ences over the war making powers of the Presidency, the stated positions of the White House and its Senate critics are in close agreement in opposing future American military in volvement in Cambodia. 
Desperately eager to head off a long‐overdue reassertion of Congressional restraints over the Presi dent's warmaking powers, the Nixon Administration strove last week to put the best possible face on what it insists will be only a limited extension of the Viet nam war into Cambodia. It remains too early to tell how much or how little military success will attend the two‐week‐old Cambodian escalation, but it is already plain that it is a political disaster.
McGeorge Bundy, who played a major role in President Lyn don B. Johnson's 1965 decision to increase American troop strength in South Vietnam, has warned that another action like President Nixon's Cambodian intervention “would tear the country and the Administration to nieces.” 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 16 — In proportion to numbers )1 men involved, the war in Cambodia has probably been costlier to the press corps than to any of fighting armies: 151 newsmen have been captured by the North Vietnamese or Vietcong and four have been wounded. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam. May 16 (AP)—A research study says the killing of Hue citizens by the Vietcong in the 1968 TeL offensive was planned and Sys tematic rather than random slaughter. 
To the Editor: It is a highly dubious suppo sition that the incursion of American troops into Cambodia will speed an honorable peace or the safe return of our sol diers. One may legitimately challenge the President's judg ment, but our emotional revul sion should not becloud the fact that his action was neither un authorized nor illegal. 
About 10,000 military men marched down Fifth Avenue without incident yesterday afternoon in celebration of Armed Forces Day. The par ticipants in the 21st annual parade, marching in a light drizzle, were received with applause, cheers and flag‐ waving by the spectators lin ing the avenue. A number of bystanders held up placards reading “We Love Our Coun try,” “Support the President” and the like. Elsewhere in the nation, Armed Forces Day ceremonies were canceled at 23 military bases because of threats of neace demonstra tions but went on without trouble at hundreds of others. At Fort Dix, N.J., where it was announced on Friday that there would be no cere monies, 3,000 antiwar demon strators massed outside the base but were prevented from entering by a line of soldiers. Some youths tried to out flank the troops by running through the woods, but the State Police stopped them. A half‐dozen demonstrators were clubbed. At Fort Meade, Md., where ceremonies were also canceled, about 300 anti war youths — perhaps 30 of them off‐duty G.I.'s in civilian clothes—heard Abbie Hoffman, the Yippie, call for a “war of liberation” by young people in the United States to force an end to the fighting in Vietnam.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 13 —Prof. Richard E. Neustad, whose classic study. “Presiden tial Power,” distinguished be tween shadow and substance, views the Nixon Presidency with distress and apprehension. 
WASHINGTON—Reporters no ticed an odd thing on the bul letin board in the White House press room last Wednesday. The President's list of appointments included, among other dignitar ies, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Leonard Garment. The Thursday schedule indicated that Mr. Nixon would see George Romney. What was odd about all this is that until last week the White House press office had made no particular effort to identify the names of aides and Cabinet members who meet with the President. 
To Judy Solomon, a 20‐year‐ old English major at City Col lege, “it's important to get la bor against the war because they're so powerful.” 
“We went down with the stock market, it's as simple as that,” an aide to Robert M. Morgenthau said last Thursday as the former Federal attorney dropped out of the race for Governor and the Dow‐Jones Industrial Average dipped below 700. 
JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 16 —The 12 nations participating in the Asian conference on Cambodia held their first day of discussions today and pro claimed a new era of Asians' responsibility for their own destiny. 
RYE, N. Y., May 16—Mr. and Mrs. Josephus Simmons Beard 2d have anounced the engagement of their daugh ter, Miss Martha Lyndley Blaine Beard, to Peter Will liam Retchin, son of Mr. and Mrs. Norman Retchin of Greenwich. Conn. 
American troops advance in Cambodia! Bomb North Vietnam! Four students killed at Kent State! Oil slicks imperil Florida coast! Atomic wastes pollute inland waters! 
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 16 (AP)—The United States Marine Corps said today that it would try four young marines for murder in the deaths of 16 Vietnamese civilians Feb. 19. 
WASHINGTON — Sporadic violence is still breaking out on some college campuses, and once again, at Jackson State wanton shooting by the forces of “law and order” has unnec essarily taken students' lives. But it is now clear that the primary response of students to the Cambodian invasion and the student deaths is not in the streets. They have returned to “the system.” even to the “old politics,” with a vigor and in genuity that has astonished many politicians. So a major question now is what the re sponse will be from “the system.” 
Can the general public be persuaded to read yet another book about Viet nam? John T. McAlister Jr., a Prince ton political scientist and Vietnam veteran, hopes so; and the hope gives him a chance to pay rather fervent homage to his late mentor, the French archeologist and anthropologist Paul Mus. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 16—Kompong Charn, Cam bodia's second city, northeast of here on the Mekong River, was in imminent danger tonight of falling to North Viet namese and Vietcong forces. 
During a climactic scene in “Good By Mr. Chips,” the old teacher continues intrepidly with the reading of a Latin text about war in another age as German bombs shake the class room. He is proud that neither fear nor crisis interferes with the business at hand. 
SEATTLE, May 16—The trial of eight persons accused of con spiring to incite the Feb. 17 vio lent demonstration at the Fed eral Courthouse here has been scheduled for Aug. 10 before Federal District Judge George Boldt of Tacoma. 
FORT DIX, N.J., May 16 — More than 3,000 antiwar de monstrators massed at the main gate of this sprawling military post today but were denied entry by a line of military policemen with fixed bayonets. 
DETROIT, May 16—“Sure, a lot of workers feel Nixon should have gone to Congress before the Cambodia thing. But they go right back to supporting the President when they see what's happening on the campus.” 
FIFTY years ago, T. S. Eliot described the endless crowds flow ing over London Bridge at dawn and wrote, 
WASHINGTON, May 16—At some point in the business of the New York construction workers last week a photogra pher took a picture that makes you wonder what's going on here. The workers are seen waving flags and fists—near City Hall, says the caption— which is routine demonstration stuff, but the odd thing is this sign which is being held up by several of them.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 17—Cambodian forces were re ported today to have regained control of strategically situated Kompong Cham, Cambodia's second largest city.
BURLINGTON, Vt., May 17 (UPI) — Representative Robert T. Stafford, Republican of Ver mont, called today for the withdrawal of United States troops from Vietnam by the end of next year. Mr. Stafford, a member of the House Armed Services Committee, told the graduating class at the Univer sity of Vermont that Congress should restrict defense funds so that all combat units would be out of Vietnam by Christ mas, 1971.
WASHINGTON, May 17— Vice President Agnew and two heading Senate Democrats Staked out bitterly opposing po sitions today for a forthcoming Congressional challenge to pres idential power in foreign pol icy.
LONDON—The cause of the environment, for all its deep significance, has seemed some thing of a distraction in recent months. The moral disquiet of Americans about the Vietnam war was channeled into en vironmental protest—too often into rather empty, abstract gestures instead of the specific, difficult, controversial pro grams really required to reduce the destruction of our sur roundings.
Newsweek magazine report ed yesterday that Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird had sent a top‐secret message to Gen. Creighton W. Abrams saying that the American pub lic would be impressed by the capture of high‐ranking pris soners, major enemy headquar ters and arms caches in Cam bodia.
Bills have been introduced in at least eight state legislatures this year that are patterned after one passed by the Massa chusetts Legislature challeng ing the legality of the Amer ican war effort in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, May 17—A confrontation without known precedent will unfold here at 4 P.M. tomorrow when em ployes of a Cabinet depart ment call its Secretary on the carpet to account for his ac tions.
JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 17 — The Asian foreign min isters' conference on Cambodia called today for a reactivation of international peacekeeping machinery in Cambodia and for the early convening of a new international conference to resolve the conflict in In dochina.
PORTLAND, Me., May 17— Delegates to the state Demo cratic convention gave noisy approval last night to a strong antiwar plank in the party's platform after Senator Edmund S. Muskie discarded his prepared speech and spoke in support of the plank.
Key to Market's Fall
ATLANTA, May 17 (UPI)— Two soldiers facing a possible death sentence for charges re sulting from the alleged mas sacre at Songmy, South Viet nam, declared today that the “Army machine” was rolling over them in efforts to gain a conviction.
WASHINGTON, May 17— The Senate Foreign Relations Committee finds itself the vic tim of two centuries of Ameri can constitutional history in the current maneuvering over United States action in Cam bodia.
Howard J. Samuels charged yesnterday that Governor Rockefeller was resorting to “election year hypocrisy” if he did not take action to back his proposal to become the link be tween college students and President Nixon on peace and other national problems.
SAIGON, May 18—North Vietnamese soldiers ambushed American troops at four points in Cambodia and bottled South Vietnamese forces at six other locations yesterday according to military spokesmen, in what was termed the heaviest enemy resistance met thus far in the drive into Cambodia.
MOSCOW, May 18—The So viet Union today delivered a sharp attack on Communist China, accusing the Mao Tse tung leadership of seeking dom ination in Asia, of rejecting calls for concerted action in Indochina and creating an anti Soviet war psychosis at home.
Construction workers, hurl ing raw eggs and bags of water, pelted students demonstrating yesterday outside Board of Edu cation headquarters in down town Brooklyn.
The management of the Wall Street Journal Building put out a flag yesterday in response to demands last Friday by con struction workers who were demonstrating in the financial district against Mayor Lndsay and students opposed to United States policy in Indochina. But the flag‐raising disturbed re porters and editors on the staff of the newspaper.
WASHINGTON, May 18— Robert H. Finch, hospitalized by a puzzling arm ailment, today sent a message endors ing the movement of American troops into Cambodia to 800 Federal employes he had been scheduled to meet to hear com plaints of his leadership of the Department of Health, Educa tion and Welfare.
A group of potential draftees, a lawyer and a Navy enlisted man filed suit in Fed eral Court yesterday challeng ing President Nixon's right to send troops to Cambodia.
A gloomy audience of mortgage bankers yesterday heard Representative Henry S. Reuss, an influential member of the House Banking Committee, deliver his strongest attack to date on the Nixon Admin istration's economic policies. The Wisconsin Democrat charged that the anti‐inflation measures taken by the Admin istration were actually “pro ducing only stagnation and unemployment—and they add up to a disaster.” He spoke to more than 1,200 members of the Mortgage Bankers Associ ation of America at a national mortgage conference at the New York Hilton Hotel.
About 500 of the 3,784 stu dents receiving degrees at the University of Pennsylvania's commencement exercises yes terday walked out in response to an appeal by an antiwar speaker.
The issues of war, racism and oppression brought the New York art world together last night in an unprecedented joint political action meeting.
WASHINGTON, May 18— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird denied today a report by Newsweek magazine that he had sent a top‐secret cable gram to Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the United States com mander in Vietnam, suggesting that the American public would be impressed by the capture of high‐ranking prisoners, enemy headquarters and arms caches in Cambodia.
PRINCETON, N. J., May 18 —Two and a half weeks ago, when a student strike erupted here in angry response to the movement of American troops into Cambodia, many wondered if 1970 was to be Princeton's year of revolution as 1969 had been Harvard's year and 1968 Columbia's.
HONG KONG, Tuesday, May 19—Peking has canceled a meet ing scheduled for tomorrow in Warsaw between envoys of the United States and Communist China.
To the Editor:
PHILADELPHIA, May 18— Some 5,000 college students campaigned across Pennsylvania today for Norval D. Reece, in dependent peace candidate for the Democratic nomination for the Senate in tomorrow's pri mary election.
Following are excerpts from an editorial in Pravda, the Soviet Communist party newspaper, titled “Pseudo revolutionaries With Their Masks Off,” as distributed in English by Tass, the Soviet press agency:
National Collegiate Athletic Association officials believe there will be no interruption of their four major championship tournaments in June despite current student protests.
ROME, May 18—Pope Paul IV, in an address to a consistory of Cardinals and Bishops, made a “pressing appeal” today for a negotiated settlement of the conflicts in Indochina and the Middle East.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 18—Cambodia has asked Asian and Pacific Ocean countries to send troops to help her repel the North Vietnamese and Vietcong attackers, but the initial reac tion has been negative.
JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 18 — Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Vietnam said tonight that United States soldiers as well as South Viet namese soldiers had been cross ing the Laotian border in “hot pursuit” of enemy forces for several years.
TOKYO, May 18 (AP) — A top Cambodian official said to day that Communist China ap peared at one time to be pre pared to recognize the Cam bodian Government that ousted Prince Norodon Sihanouk last March.
BURLINGTON, Vt., May 17 (UPI) — Representative Robert T. Stafford, Republican of Ver mont, called Sunday for the withdrawal of United States troops from Vietnam by the end of next year. Mr. Stafford, a member of the House Armed Services Committee, told the graduating class at the Univer sity of Vermont that Congress should restrict defense funds so that all combat units would be out of Vietnam by Christ mas. 1971.
WASHINGTON, May 18— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that both United States and South Viet namese forces had made brief incursions into Laos on specific, limited missions in the past, but he insisted that no Ameri cans were engaged in ground combat on Laotian territory now.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 18—South Vietnamese officials vigorously denied today reports that Foreign Minister Lam Said in Jakarta yesterday that South Vietnamese ground forces had struck in Laos along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
ANDOVER, Mass., May 18— Eight‐seven members of the Phillips Academy faculty have signed a petition urging Presi dent Nixon to seek the advice and consent of Congress in re viewing United States policy in Southeast Asia. There are about 125 members on the faculty roster.
CHICAGO, May 11 — The national meat cutters and butt ers tradeunion has attacked George Meany, president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Or ganizations, for his support of the war in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 1S—North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces were reported to have attacked a key high way junction in Cambodia to day and to have encircled the town of Tram Khnar, 25 miles south of Pnompenh, the capital.
The pros and cons of Ameri can military withdrawal from South Vienam and South Korea, were spelled out by a William College political scientist, who found cogent arguments on both sides of the issue.
WASHINGTON, May 19— President Nixon held his first Cabinet meeting today after a month of crisis. But there was no official evi dence that he had resolved his differences with Cabinet members who have criticized the substance and style of his Presidency.
Those artists, dealers and museum officials who have organized for joint anti‐war action are pursuing the wrong course in a good cause. To close museums in the name of peace is as irrational as shutting down universities for the same purpose. Taking over museums to “help politicize visitors” is an abuse of cultural institutions, intolerable in the case of publicly supported ones.
WASHINGTON, May 19—The White House was working be hind the scenes today in an at tempt to reach an accommoda tion with a bipartisan coalition in the Senate that is seeking to impose legislative restrictions on future military activities in Cambodia.
Antiwar activity somewhat muted by final examinations as the academic year draws to a close on many campuses, con tinued at colleges and univer sities around the country yes terday, with protest actions flaring only occasionally into violence.
WASHINGTON, May 19 [UPI]—The Senate is expected to debate the war in Southeast Asia for the next month. Following are the principal measures it will consider.
Petitions are circulating. Paintings are coming off gal lery walls. Posters are rolling off the presses. The city's art community is mobilizing for an all‐out protest, aimed at war, racism and oppression.
SAN FRANCISCO, May 19— The shattering of labor union support in this area for Presi dent Nixon's Indochina policies was signaled yesterday in full page advertisements in both The San Francisco Chronicle and The Examiner.
TOKYO, May 19—The Japan ese Government decided today to send special envoys to Brit ain, the Soviet Union and the United Nations to promote the Jakarta conference's proposal of a broad international con ference to deal with the prob lems of Indochina.
The eleven Asian nations that met in Jakarta last weekend to discuss the Cambodian crisis showed good judgment in focusing their efforts on a broader search for a peaceful settlement of the over‐all Indochina problem.
PHILADELPHIA, Wednes day, May 20 — Milton J. Shapp claimed a victory early today over State Auditor Gen eral Robert P. Casey, the party's endorsed candidate in yesterday's Democratic gov ernorship primary.
NUI SAM, South Vietnam, May 18—“We call it the White House red line,” the South Viet namese officer said, pointing to an irregular line marked in red grease‐pencil on his operational map.
TAIPEI, Taiwan (Reuters)— Behind the bar among the whisky bottles in night clubs here you can sometimes spot a university textbook, and the woman who smiles enticingly at you as she pours your drink may be working her way through the university.
Declaring that he was satis fied with the efforts of spon sors of today's rally at City Hall by construction workers to maintain order, Mayor Lindsay yesterday appealed to citizens of all political views to make it “a peaceful day.”
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 19 —For four years Noam Chom sky, the scholar in linguistics and antiwar crusader, has filled publications and campus lecture halls with relentless argument against United States involve ment in Asia and exhortations to American intellectuals to op pose the war.
Former Chief Justice Earl Warren said last night that the was in Indochina “has brought to fevor pitch our crisis, al ready heightened by racial ten sions, crime, poverty, inflation and pollution of the environ ment.”
Most college and university campuses were relatively quiet yesterday, with the emphasis as much on political planning as on demonstrations, although one episode of violence oc curred, apparently unrelated to the nationwide protest move ment.
PHILADELPHIA, May 20 — Milton J. Shape, an insurgent, narrowly won the Democratic nomination for Governor for the second consecutive time yesterday, again beating State Auditor General Robert P. Casey and the disorganized Democratic organization.
WASHINGTON. May 20 Fifty Foreign Service officers who signed a letter to Secre tary of State William P. Rogers, two weeks ago protesting the United States operation in Cambodia have been warned by their superiors that they acted out of turn in publicly criticizing the Administration.
Five battalions of South Vietnamese troops with American advisers thrust across the Cambodian border yesterday in an area northeast of Saigon, between the northern most allied operation near the river Se San and the operation in the Fishhook region. No significant contact with North Vietnam ese troops was reported. The new operation plugs a large gap in the pattern of thrusts into Cambodia. [Page 1, Column 1.]
ST. PAUL. May 20—Former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey laid today that he privately warned President Nixon last fall that any step enlarging the war in Indochina would be a disaster for this country.
DUCLAP, South Vietnam, May 20 — Some 2,500 South Vietnamese soldiers supported by American air power and advisers opened a new front in Cambodia today, thrusting across the border near this Special Forces camp 125 miles northeast of Saigon.
Marching under a sea of American flags, helmeted con struction workers led tens of thousands of noisy but peaceful demonstrators yesterday in a rally and parade supporting the Vietnam policies of Presi dent Nixon and assailing Mayor Lindsay and other op ponents of the war in Indo china.
BUFFALO, May 20—About 1.500 construction workers demonstrated in support of the Nixon Administration's policies in southeast Asia at a rally this noon in front of City Hall.
TOKYO, May 20 (UPI)— Following is the text of a statement on the United States issued today by Mao Tse‐tung, the Chinese Com munist party chairman, as broadcast in English from Peking:
WASHINGTON, May 20 — G. Alexander Heard recognizes the fact that some students to day feel themselves at war with the rest of society, and he has given himself until June 30 to negotiate an armistice.
WASHINGTON, May 20 — The nation's capital, inundat ed in recent weeks with stu dents lobbying against the war in Indochina, had a new lobby on its hands today — more than 1,000 New York City law yers, mostly well barbered, well‐tailored and well‐pre pared with legal arguments against the war.
BIENHOA, South Vietnam, May 20—A South Vietnamese general hinted today that South Vietnamese troops would stay in Cambodia until the Vietcong and North Vietnamese were driven back to North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, May 20 — The United States today pub licly acknowledged for the first time the possibility that South Vietnamese troops might re main in Cambodia after the withdrawal of United States forces, scheduled to be com pleted by June 30.
TAKEO, Cambodia, May 20 (Agence France‐Presse)—South Vietnamese troops linked up with Cambodian soldiers today in a small town 25 miles north of here after a cross‐country drive from the South Vietna mese border in which they re ported killing more than 400 Vietcong.
To the Editor: I am concerned about the suggestion of a simple causal relation between environmental contamination and population growth. This juxtaposition has been placed in the minds of the public by advertising by special interest groups, news paper editorials and magazine articles.
WASHINGTON, May 20— Commissioner of Education James E. Allen Jr. has sent a letter of conciliation to a 9‐year‐old California girl who had received a harsh reply to her criticism of the war.
WASHINGTON, May 20—The White House was reportedly faced today with the possibility of a revolt by some moderate and liberal Republican Senators if it failed to go along with an amendment cutting off funds for future military involvement in Cambodia.
BUFFALO, May 21 (AP)— Natheniel James stood before a City Court judge today, accused of public intoxica tion. “Were you drunk?” Judge Michael E. Zimmer asked Mr. James, 43 years old.
WASHINGTON, May 21—The Nixon Administration, clearly embarrassed by the controver sy over the future status of South Vietnamese forces in Cambodia, was reported today to have instructed its two senior representatives in Sai gon to discuss the problem urgently with the Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu.I
A poll of 394 political scien tists who teach at United States colleges shows that, if Ameri can involvement in Indochina continues at its present level, two‐thirds fear a struggle be tween the President and Con gress over whose decision on foreign policy shall prevail.
To the Editor: As a clergyman who for fifty years in the parish ministry has been a member of most of the peace, interfaith and ecumeni cal agencies. I plead for under standing and support of Presi dent Nixon in his efforts to achieve peace.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. May 21—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky declared today that South Vietnamese troops were deter mined to remain in Cambodia after the planned withdrawal of American troops from that country by the end of June.
Nine antiwar demonstrators were injured yesterday when the police forcibly dispersed at Avenue of the Americas and 39th Street a militant group that had marched uptown from a peace rally of 20,000 at City Hall.
About 5,000 Ohio National Guardsmen were alerted to active duty in the area of Ohio State University in Colum bus last night after demonstrat ing students, led by militant blacks, smashed dozens of store windows and looted shops in the campus area.
The firmness with which Senators of both parties are resisting efforts to kill or cripple the Cooper Church amendment on Cambodia is encouraging evi dence of a new determination in Congress to restore the constitutional balance in reaching vital decisions on war and peace.
WASHINGTON, May 21— The Democratic National Chair man, Lawrence F. O'Brien, ac cused President Nixon today of failing to generate an essen tial “atmosphere of confidence”, in the foreign and domestic policies of his Admistration.
The Columbia Broadcast Sys tem re‐ran with supporting evi dence last night a film that the network said was the target of a White House “undercover campaign to discredit C.B.S. News.”
PARIS, May 21—The 67th session of the Paris conference on Vietnam today produced agreement only to meet again next Thursday.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 21—The spokesman for Cam bodia's military command to day stepped beyond his normal military briefing to address correspondents emotionally on his feelings toward the Viet namese. Venturing outside the present policy line, Major Am rone, declared that any Cam bodian would rather die than live under Vietnamese domina tion.
GREENWICH, Conn., May 21 —The executive council of the 3.5‐million‐member Episcopal Church passed a resolution yes terday calling for “total with drawal of all American forces from Southeast Asia now and and end to the war.”
SALISBURY, Dhodesia, May 21 (Agence France‐Presse) — Rhodesians gave Prime Minister John Vorster of South Africa an enthusiastic welcome upon his arrival at Salisbury airport today for a two‐day official visit. As Mr. Vorster left the aircraft a crowd of about 100 Europeans cheered and shouted “Well done.”
WASHINGTON, May 21—The president of Bloomingdale's, the head of Random House, the au thor of “The Rothchilds,” an in vestment banker, the former Gloria Vanderbilt and her hus band, Wyatt Cooper, and as sorted envoys from New York's worlds of culture, business and fasihon became lobbyists today.
WASHINGTON, May 21—The White House and its Senate critics were at an impasse to day in their attempt to reach an accommodation on a move to prohibit future military ac tivities in Cambodia without the consent of Congress.
WASHINGTON, May 21—Dr. James E. Allen Jr., the United States Commissioner of Educa tion who was appointed by President Nixon, disagreed today with the Administration over the Indochina war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 21—The United States com mand said today that 217 American soldiers were killed in Southeast Asia last week. This was the highest weekly toll since last August.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 21—A Government spokes‐, man announced today the re opening of high schools and primary schools, which have been closed since May 6 be cause of student unrest. The universities, however, will ap parently remain shut.
WASHINGTON, May 21— In a preliminary assessment of the United States and South South Vietnamese troop thrusts into Cambodia, the Pentagon said today that enemy head quarters units had suffered “se rious disruption” and had been forced to flee deeper into the interior.The estimate of damage in flicted on the enemy forces avoided any assertion that the Communist headquarters, known as the Central Office for South Vietnam, or COSVN — had been captured, but it pre sented a picture of confusion and retreat in the enemy camp.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 22 (AP)—President Nguyen Van Thieu asked the National As sembly yesterday for broad new powers for five months to deal with the nation's economic problems.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 22 The Government of South Vietnam has decided to halt the mass evacuation of refugees by boat down the Mekong River, leaving about 70,000 Vi etnamese stranded in assembly camps here.
WASHINGTON, May 22 — Senator J. W. Fullbright said today that Lhe Senate Foreign Relations Committee had re ceived sworn testimony from an Army sergeant that military television team in Vietnam had staged several combat incidents by South Vietnamese troops.
WASHINGTON, May 22 — The United States was reported today to be prepared to con tinue air cover, if needed, for South Vietnamese forces that are considered almost certain to remain in Cambodia after the American withdrawal deadline, July 1.
HONG KONG, May 22—Mao Tse‐tung's call this week for world revolution against “Unit ed States imperialism” and yesterday's mass rally that he attended in Peking's Tienanmen Square supporting the call are regarded here as moves to emphasize further Communist China's revolutionary leader ship role.
The Daily News refused to accept an advertisement yester day from more than 100 of its editorial employes condemning the war in Southeast Asia.
HOUSTON, May 22 — Vice President Agnew renewed his attack on his critics in the “liberal news media” to night, dismissing statements by editorial writers and column ists that he and President Nixon had contributed to re cent campus disorders with their public comments.
Since Moscow and Peking coordinate virtually noth ing important these days, it was sheer coincidence that on the same morning this week the Chinese called off the scheduled meeting with American repre sentatives in Warsaw while Pravda loosed one of its most severe attacks against Mao and his policies. Nevertheless the juxtaposition of these two events helps provide a useful perspective on present relation ships in the vital Washington‐Moscow‐Peking triangle.
Student protests continued across the nation yesterday. In the New York area, demon strations were few and peace ful.
Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security ad viser, and Budget Director Rob ert P. Mayo are scheduled to meet with Wall Street and busi ness leaders within the next 10 days to discuss the effect of the Government's policies on the stock market.
Nearly 500 participants in the New York Art Strike— artists, art students, art teach ers and gallery employes—sat in yesterday on the steps of the Metropolitan Museum and suc ceeded in drastically reducing its normal daily attendance of 4,000.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 22—South Vietnam has dou bled the size of its forces oper ating within Cambodia during the last week.
Paul O'Dwyer, who is 20 years older than any of his three opponents for the Dem ocratic nomination for United States Senator, says that re election would never be on his mind if he became a Sen ator, and that he would play an independent Washington role, “like the LaFollettes.”
DETROIT, May 22 — Crit ics of the giant General Motors Corporation received only min iscule support from sharehold ers for their proposals today, but they used the annual meet ing here to stir debate on pol lution control, car safety and minority hiring.
President Nixon sent a young aide to Columbia University to find out why he had a “problem” with the academic community.
LONDON, May 22—Through all the years of war and frus trated negotiation and plans for American withdrawal, there has been one central question for the United States in Vietnam: to what extent would we he committed to the objectives of the Saigon Government?
WASHINGTON May 22 (AP) — President Nixon's daughter and son‐in‐law, Julie and David Eisenhower, accompanied Viet nam war veterans on the first of a planned series of Potomac River cruises on the Presiden tial yacht Sequoia. On the trip yesterday were 37 soldiers from service hospitals in the capital area.
VOEUN KHAM, Laos, May 20 — The thumping sounds of mor tar and artillery fire can be heard clearly in this tiny village on the Cambodian border as military officials report that Communist troops on the other side have swept north within two and a half miles Of the frontier.
The petitions to put Repre sentative R. D. Max McCarthy on the ballot for the Demo cratic nomination for Senator were cut down to the bare minimum of 47 counties yes terday—with the validity of the signatures from two of those counties still in doubt.
An enthusiastic crowd of 600 attended a rally advertised as being for the “silent majority” last night at Manhattan Center, cheering speeches by former mayoral candidates Mario A. Procaccino and John J. Marchi and applauding a self‐pro claimed police undercover in formant.

SNOUL, Cambodia, May 19 —None of the people here understand why it has hap nened to them.
WASHINGTON, May 23— While Senators debate the Cambodian issue, a struggle is reported going on in the White House for the mind of President Nixon on the proposed Cooper Church amendment to the for eign Military Sales Act, now before the Senate.
WASHINGTON — Yet again in this Indochina War, the mer its of a military venture are be ing calculated here in terms of enemy killed, weapons captured, difficulties imposed, attacks de ferred, allied lives saved. The debate over the move into Cam bodia, like the past debates over the bombing of North Vietnam, the commitment of combat troops to South Vietnam and the decision to search‐and‐destroy the countryside, has become sta tistical when the avowed objec tive, as always before, is in fact political.
For the first time as a re sult of a university investiga tion, Columbia University has lodged felony charges against three students involved in demonstration on the campus.
SAN FRANCISCO, May 22— Representative George E. Brown Jr., who was a dove on Vietnam before the term was adopted, appears to have taken a narrow lead in the race for the Democratic senatorial nom ination in California.
Indochina's biggest rubber plantation was attacked from two sides by about 10,000 South Vietnamese troops yesterday in a drive against what was described as an enemy regiment. The plantation is about 50 miles northeast of Pnompenh. The South Vietna mese force, supported by tanks and armored vehicles, was opposing the 272d Vietcong regiment, believed to be made up of about 2,000 men. [Page 1, Column 8.]
THURMONT, Md., May 23 (UPI)—President Nixon rested at his Camp David mountain retreat today while some citi zens of this nearby factory town ciruculated petitions of tion's Indochina policies. “We think your decisons in Viet nam and Cambodia are in the best nterests of America,” the pettion said.
Traditionally, commencement speeches tended to offer the be nevolent view from the Establish nient. But if there has been a rev olution on the nation's campuses, this year's commencements‐ where they can be held at all tell the story. Speakers from the Establishment—with special dis pensation for Interior Secretary Walter Hickel and possibly Health, Education and Welfare Secretary Robert Finch—will be hard to find on major campuses.
TUSCALOOSA, Ala., May 19 —When the University of Alabama’ football team endured one of its worst seasons in re cent history last fall, some people on the campus began to suspect that this would not be just another academic year.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia —The failure of the Jakarta Conference to offer concrete assistance to Cambodia to repel Vietnamese Communist invaders leaves Cam bodia at the mercy of the United States and South Vietnam—the countries already at war with Cambodia's enemies.
SCARSDALE, May 23 — Wealthy Scarsdale has been known for its community con cern for the excellence of its public schools, and so it sur prised many here and in the rest of Westchester when the voters defeated a proposed school budget two weeks ago, for the first time in the village's history.
ATLANTIC CITY, N.J., M.ay 23—The New Jersey Bar Asso ciation rejected a resolution to day to oppose the United States military action in Cam bodia and to challenge the le gality of President Nixon's decision.
WAHOO, Neb., May 15—The unease at John F. Kennedy College is different.
Arthur J. Goldberg, a candi date for the Democratic nom ination for Governor, declared yesterday that this country faced a “galloping” recession unless it imposed selective wage, price and credit controls and developed a job program for the unemployed.
Sixty Protestant, Roman Catholic and Jewish religious leaders have announced the convening of an “emergency religious convocation” in Wash ington this week to mobilize support to end the war in Indo china.
WASHINGTON — On an in side corridor of the ground floor of the Executive Office Build ing, next to the White House, there is a big room awash with mail. Two hundred and fifty thousand letters were backed up there the other day, letters to the President of the United States on the issues of Cam bodia and Kent. At least an other 100,000 already had been processed, and about 75,000 more were in the pipeline.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 23—Nearly a month after American and South Vietnamese troops began attacking Commu nist sanctuaries inside Cam bodia, allied commanders are describibg the campaign as an outstanding military success.
WASHINGTON, May 23— Seven leading Senate opponents of the war in Indochina assured the Nixon Administration today of their support for a policy of American firmness against the “ominous and provocative” Soviet thrust against Israel.
CHICAGO, May 23—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told 500 Presbyterians this morning that Christianity demanded that men in public office be “dual servants of both God and of the people.”
WALTHAM, Mass. — In the montage of student activism that papers the walls of a small building on the green, sloping campus of Brandeis University, the photograph of a dark‐haired girl screamng above the body of a Kent State student is taped next to a computer‐arawing or Snoopy, the insouciant beagle.
WASHINGTON, May 23 — Senator William B. Spong Jr. sat patiently at the head of a long table the other day as stu dents poured into the small conference room of the Senate Agriculture Committee.
WASHINGTON, May 23—A highly profitable political part nership appears to have bloomed in Peking over the last two months between Mao Tse‐tung, Chairman of the Chi nese Communist Party, and Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who was ousted as Cambodia's Chief of State last March 18.
TRENTON, May 23—With the war in Vietnam one of the dom inant Issues in New Jersey's Senatorial primary election, Senator Harrison A. Williams, a democrat, has spoken out more and more in opposition to the United States military in volvement in Indochina.
QUANLOI, South Vietnam —Most of the G.I.'s went into Cambodia without say ing anything. Like all the combat assaults they had been on before, when muscles knot, throats dry and stom achs seem to go berserk, this assault—into another coun try—was greeted mostly with silence.
IN a time of national divi sion the practice of au tomatically according the President such free tele vision time as he asks clearly needs careful review. Since the President is Commander in Chief of the country's armed forces and the nation's duly elected leader, there is no question of television's obligation to carry his speeches and major deci sions.
WASHINGTON — Vice Pres ident Ky, who is South Viet nam's Agnew, has called the statement that South Vietna mese troops would withdraw from Cambodia when Ameri ca's troops did “a silly argu ment of silly people.” This is a harsh way for an ally to speak of President Nixon, who said on May 9 that he “would expect that the South Vietna mese would come out approxi mately at the same time that we do because when we come out, our logistical support and air support will also come out with them.”
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 23—Witnesses reported today that five fighter planes of the South Vietnamese Air Force bombed and strafed the rubber processing plant at Chup this morning, leaving it aflame and causing at least 15 deaths among the 550 workers. Eighty persons were said to have been wounded.
JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 23 — President Suharto has ex pressed concern that if the big powers cannot control the In dochina conflict, it could lead to a third world war.
Efforts by the New York local of the American Federa tion of Television and Radio Artists to arrive at o public position on United States in volvement in Indochina have provoked bitter controversy within the union.
Moscow and Peking are at each other's throats again in an effort to gain influence in Indo china. These great‐power shout ing matches dominate the head lines; but it is the country they are seeking to influence, North Vietnam, that runs the show in Indochina.
Five hundred nurses and nursing students, about two‐ thirds of them in white uni forms, marched from Bryant Park down Fifth Avenue to Union Square yesterday sing ing, “All we are saying is give peace a chance.”
Saigon's announced determination to keep South Vietnamese troops in Cambodia indefinitely, which has now been publicly sanctioned by Defense Secre tary Laird, is a direct challenge to the Administration's own professed efforts and those of Congress to re establish limits to the Southeast Asian conflict.
WASHINGTON, May 23 — Five hundred employes of the Office of Education have signed petitions supporting Dr. James E. Allen Jr., Commissioner of Education, in his disagreement with the Administration over the Vietnam war.
HEMPSTEAD, L.I, May 23 (UPI)—Despite opposing view points about the war, students, faculty members and adminis trators at Hofstra University in Hempstead have contributed 275 pints of blood to United States forces in South Vietnam and Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, May 23— Among the few certainties in this, uncertain age is Vice President Spiro Agnew. Some how he vanishes during the week, but almost always he shows up at the weekend some where in Iowa, South Carolina or Texas, shaking his fist at the press and trying to divert every body's attention from the war and the economy to the hairy scoundrels in the universities and the press.
WASHINGTON, May 23—Two of the gentlest war protesters President Nixon will ever see— if he ever sees them—lay in the shade of a horse chestnut tree today across the street from the White House.
The four candidates for the Democratic Senate nomination met for the first time yester day in one of the television debates that have become a feature of New York political campaigns, and two of them went on the attack.
DANANG, South Vietnam, May 24 (AP)—A lieutenant in the Marine Corps has been charged with premeditated murder in the death of a Viet namese near Danang on March 28, a marine spokesman re ported today.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 24 (AP) — Five newsmen, in cluding a Pulitzer Prize‐winning photographer, were detained by North Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia this weekend but were quickly released.
Mayor Lindsay called yester day for a mandatory six‐month freeze on wages and price rises as the first step in bringing in flation under control.
LOS ANGELES, May 24 (AP)—Glenn Dumke, chancellor of the California state college system, banned today the sched uled appearance Tuesday night of William M. Kunstler at San Jose State College. Mr. Kunst ler was the chief defense law yer of the Chicago 7. In a directive, Mr. Dumke said: “Disorders involving personal Injuries and property damage have occurred following cer tain of Mr. Kunstler's appear ances.” He then barred the lawyer.
The flags waved and the speeches jingoed when the United States embarked on its first armed adventure in Asia. Even before the shooting war began in the Pacific the dis senting war broke out in America.
Incursion Scored
CARLISLE, Pa., May 24 — Tom Wicker, associate editor of The New York Times, told the graduating class of Dick inson College today that “the deepest hunger in the Amer ican soul today... is for something truly useful to do with one's life.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, May 25 (Reuters)— Foreign Minister Yem Sambaur of Cambodia arrived here today for talks with South Vietna mese leaders about incursions into his country by South Viet namese and American troops.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 24 (Agence France Presse)— The Government radio today countered a declaration by a military spokesman Thursday that Cambodians would prefer to die rather than “live under Vietnamese domination.”
WASHINGTON, May 24—Sec retary of State William P. Rogers indicated today that the Administration would not op pose continued South Viet namese operations in Cambodia after American forces are pulled out, and he left open the pos sibility that American air sup port would be provided.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 24 (AP)—Phan Khac Suu, a political leader, died today after a brief illness. He was 65 years old.
In the belief that all four candidates would support the goals they seek to achieve, student representatives for the New York Region of the Move ment for a New Congress have not endorsed any of them for the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 24—A South Vietnamese task force seized the large rubber plantation of Chup late yester day and witnesses reported to day that the force had confis cated all movable assets and had given the French managers three days to leave.
ATLANTIC CITY, May, 24— The head of one of the nation's largest trade unions broke to day with the leadership of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations and condemned the Vietnam and Cambodian war policies of the Nixon Ad ministration.
“News in Perspective,” Na tional Educational Television's weekly topical discussion pro gram, will present an exclusive interview with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam tomorrow night. The program, to be seen here on WNDT, Channel 13, was filmed last Saturday in Saigon. Clifton Daniel, an associate Editor of The New York Times is the moderator. 
CHICAGO, May 25—The General Assembly of the Unit ed Presbyterian Church, em broiled in debate over the Vietnam War, asked today that President Nixon or an official representative come here and outline United States policy in Southeast Asia. 
A group of Yale University professors, law students and leaders of the New Haven black coalition have filed a petition with the Federal Communica tions Commission asking a curb on President Nixon's access to the television networks when opponents of the Indochina war have not been accorded an equal opportunity for air time.
WASHINGTON, May 25 — The withdrawal of all United States ground troops from Cambodia is to be completed ahead of the June 30 deadline under present plans of the Nixon Administration, senior. Government officials said to day. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 25—Pacification in South Viet nam is reported to have suf fered a slight setback last month.
WASHINGTON, May 25 — This capital is worrying about “credibility” again, but the worry this time is just as great inside the Government as among its critics.
The strong public opposition to widening the war in Southeast Asia has not prevented the Administra tion from pursuing the Cambodian intervention by proxy, sustaining South Vietnamese troops in opera tions that go far beyond the announced objective of cleaning out border sanctuaries.
ATLANTIC CITY, May 25— Former Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul C. Warnke and three United States Senators called here today for speedy disengagement by the United States from the wars in Viet nam and Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, May 25—A fairly good political case could be made that in every election since 1932, each time the Demo crats have had a good chance to run against Herbert Hoover and the Depression, they have elected a President. In this anal ysis, the Republicans have taken the White House only when they have been able to shift the issue from the state of the economy to Korea and Commu nism (1952) or to Vietnam and crime (1968). President Nixon, for one, is said to be convinced that it was the recession of 1960 that really did him in, the first time he ran.
PARIS, May 25—Battle dam age to French investments in Cambodia is aggravating both the pessimism on the Paris Stock Exchange and the anxi ety in France over latest Amer ican policy in the Far East. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 25—Foreign Minister Yem Sambaur of Cambodia said here today that although his country “highly appreciated the coop eration of the South Viet namese armed forces in rooting out Communist military bases in Cambodia,” he did not intend to raise the question of “a for mal military alliance” with South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, May 25— The Supreme Court unani mously struck down today a provision of a Federal statute that makes it a crime for an actor to wear United States military apparel in a theatrical production if the portrayal re flects discredit on the armed forces. 
WASHINGTON, May 25 (AP) —About 250 medical personnel from Harvard University visited Capitol Hill today to tell Sena tors, Representatives and aides of the impact that the Vietnam war was having on the health care profession. They voiced concern about the ability of the nation to meet critical needs in the quality of health care, medical search and education becaure of the war.
TOKYO, May 25 (AP)—Japan exported to South Vietnam last year 213,897 tape recorders worth $22.5‐million, Finance Ministry officials said today. They said most of the tape re corders were believed to have been purchased by American soldiers in South Vietnam. 
MOSCOW, May 25—The So viet Union has warned the cur rent Cambodian leaders that Cambodia “will be plunged into a long fratricidal war” un less United States and South Vietnamese forces are with drawn from their country. 
The Times did a disservice to the state primary by suggesting [editorial May 13] that with the Liberal party” supporting my op ponent the primary race for Governor was now “academic”. I disagree. 
TARRYTOWN, N. Y., May 25—Marymount College is still feeling the effects of a court suit filed earlier this month against a strike at the college —even though the suit was settled out of court and the college says it was never on strikp to begin with. 
Considerations that entered into endorsements by the New York Region of the Movement for a New Congress, a college political action group, will be among subjects discussed at 2:30 P.M. news conference to day by Stephen A. O. Golden, regional director, in the. Co lumbia Law School faculty lounge.
Information reaching New York from sources close to Communist leaders in Asia sug gests that the United States move into Cambodia has trans formed the Indochina situation more radically than originally estimated. This evaluation is be ing taken seriously in Wash ington. 
ROME, May 25—Secretary of State William P. Rogers today defended United States inter vention in Cambodia as “one of the most courageous and suc cessful actions for many years.” 
The city spent $1,158,000 in overtime pay for police men assigned to keep order during downtown demonstra tions in the 12‐day period from May 11 to May 22.
Paul O'Dwyer broke yester day with the other three can didates for the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate by urging estab lishment of government centers to administer free drugs to narcotics addicts. 
Just as each publisher must have his sex book, his sports book and his Vietnam book, so each publisher must also have his autobiography of a young radical. Auto biographies of young radicals arrive these days in dozens, like cartons of eggs, and reviewers tend to try to make omelets out of them. It won't work. All the eggs may look alike to the eye of a construction worker or a Vice President or a Bruno Bettelheim, but inside each Is inconvenient ly unique. James Kunen is not Dotson Rader is not Paul Cowan is not Jerry Rubin is not Don MacNeill is not Bobby Seale. 
VIENNA, May 25 (Reuters) —Prince Norodom Sihanouk. the deposed Cambodian Chief of State, arrived in Hanoi to day amid indications that North Vietnam would not send more troops into Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 25 (AP) — The United States command reported to day that American battlefield deaths had reached 201 in 25 days of operations in Cam bodia.
STOCKHOLM. May 25—Dr. Jerome H. Holland, the United States Ambassador to Sweden, complained today that he had been subjected to “disgrace ful” demonstrations protesting United States policy in South east Asia and warned that they could have “far‐reaching im plications.” 
WASHINGTON, May 25— Countering Democratic charges that Americans are losing con fidence in President Nixon, the Republican National Chairman released poll figures today in dicating that a majority of the voters approve of the Presi dent's decision to send Ameri can troops into Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, May 25 (UPI) —There are now 513 Army generals, about 50 per cent more than before the Vietnam war. Part of the reason is the increased size of the armed forces and part is that promo tions come more quickly in time of combat. 
Case for the SST
ATLANTIC CITY, May 26— George Meany, who was billed as the sole speaker Thursday at the convention of the Amal gamated Clothing Workers of America, will not come here to address the 417,000‐member union. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, May 27 — The Governments of South Vietnam and Cambodia agreed here to day that South Vietnamese troops would be pulled out of Cambodia “as soon as their mission is completed.”
Arts. President Nixon an nounced the appointment of 49 persons to be members of the Advisory Committee on the Arts of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Per forming Arts. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 26 (AP)—United States infan trymen were reported battling enemy forces at four points around the Cambodian town of Memot today, the third straight day Americans have reported increased enemy attacks in the Fishhook region over the bor der north of Saigon. 
CHICAGO, May. 26—George Romney, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, today asked the general assembly of the United Preshyterien Church to withhold judgment on the in vasion of Cambodia, “for a few weeks.” 
MIAMI, May 26 (AP) — Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation raided the headquarters yesterday of Al pha 66, a militantly anti‐Castro group, days after a Government decision that attacks on Cuba from United States territory by exiles must stop. 
PORTLAND, Me., May 26—A former Marine Corps lance cor poral who was convicted by a court‐martial of murdering five Vietnam civilians in 1968, is trying for the third time to be released from his 20‐year sen tence. 
WASHINGTON, May 26—Sec retary of Defense Melvin R. Laird is said to have asked American commanders in Viet nam whether, in light of recent operations against suspected enemy base areas in Cambodia, the United States can withdraw more troops from Vietnam by May 1, 1971 than the 150,000 announced by President Nixon last month. 
The Yale University group of professors and law students, expanding on the release of their petition to the Federal Communications Commission, stressed yesterday that it did not wish to impair the right of President Nixon to use the television networks as he felt necessary in the public interest.
LOUISVILLE, Ky., May 26 (UPI)—State Senator Romano J. Mazzoli, 37 years old, a dove on the Vietnam war, won today the Democratic nomination for Representative from the Third District (Louisville and south ern suburbs) by a substantial margin over his hawk oppo nent, State Senator Tom Ray. 
WASHINGTON, May 26—In the first vote in a prolonged Cambodia debate, the Senate made clear today that it en dorsed President Nixon's troop withdrawal plans, although it remained divided on curbing any future military involvement in Cambodia. 
FIRE‐SUPPORT BASE SA BER, Cambodia, May 21— The Indochina war could not look meaner or messier than it does here, with tanks and men and guns in the mud. 
BEIRUT, Lebanon, May 26— Premier Rashid Karami said to night in the National Assembly that the Lebanese Government was considering calling in troops from Morocco and Tuni sia or other Arab countries to help defend Lebanon against Israel. 
International
WASHINGTON, May 26 — The Nixon Administration, un der a barrage of criticism from, politicians and financiers, stood firmly by its economic policies today. 
WASHINGTON, May 26— The antiwar lobbying effort on Capitol Hill was reinforced today by delegations of nation ally known clergymen, by scholars and suburbanites.
HONG KONG, May 27—Com munist China will provide more military and economic aid to North Vietnam under an agree ment announced today.
WASHINGTON, May 26— President Nixon welcomed President Suharto of Indo nesia to the White House today and told him during a 90‐minute conference that the joint United States South Vietnamese operation in Cambodia was a success. The two men held the first of two meetings scheduled during President Suharto's three‐day stay in Washing ton. He is on a week‐long state visit to the United States. At his arrival at the White House President Su harto said that “my visit comes at a time when the need for sincere and realistic efforts in the interest of peace and stability in the world, and in Southeast Asia in particular, has become ever more pressing.” Speak ing in Indonesian during the welcoming ceremonies, Presi dent Suharto told Mr. Nixon through an interpreter: “The restoration of peace and stabil ity in this region will require the combined endeavors of all countries in the area as well as of those external powers hav ing a responsibility; in the maintenance of world peace.”
WASHINGTON, May 26—A State Department official said today that the department agreed completely with state ments made yesterday by the United States Ambassador to Sweden, who, complained of “disgraceful” demonstrations by Swedes protesting American policy in Southeast Asia. 
The New York Court of Ap peals yesterday rejected a re quest from the faculty of the New York University Law School to allow striking law students to take the state bar examination without first tak ing this semester's final exami nations. 
Stanley Sweetheart, a junior at Columbia, lost his virginity at 16, wears his hair discreetly long and has the kind of trouble with girls that a liberated Henry Aldrich might have. After a very earnest campaign, he succeeds in deflowering one of Grosse Pointe's prettiest and dimmest candidates for higher education. Later, he himself is seduced by her ravenous, overweight roommate (while starring her in an underground movie called "Masturbation"). Depending on the way you regard such things, Stanley finally hits bottom, or top, when he winds up in an East Village ménage à trois with two extremely cheerful (and flexible) Lesbians.Stanley is a role-player—basically innocent. "The Magic Garden of Stanley Sweetheart" isn't.It peers and peeks more than any average Russ Meyer movie, and it talks dirtier than just about any commercial movie that I can remember. Its camera swings and there is a lot of rock music on the soundtrack. However, like so many other places of expensive, modish, retail merchandise, it remains calculatingly bland, with no more wit or point of view than "Search for Tomorrow," although it occasionally takes a reproving, almost motherly look at the dirty dishes, the piled-up garbage and empty beer cans that litter Stanley's apartment.The film, which opened yesterday at the Paris Theater, was adapted for the screen by Robert T. Westbrook from his own quite funny, reportedly semi-autobiographical novel. Although the novel was not specifically dated in time, it was apparently meant to be more or less contemporary.The novel's Stanley is not a political animal (the book makes no attempt to cover the Columbia riots of 1968), but its Stanley is facing Vietnam and, in one of Stanley's nicest, Mittyesque moments, he commits himself to non-commitment by tearing up his draft card and sending it off to his draft board with a letter that starts: "I've been watching your ugly, stupid viciousness on TV for long enough. . . ."In spite of the fact that the movie's Stanley goes to the real-life Columbia (the film was photographed entirely in New York), there is no draft and no Vietnam. There is only a terrible feeling of déjà vu about the life styles it does cover. Underground movies were funny about seven or eight years ago, and Don Johnson plays Stanley as if he were imitating Marlon Brando, who was imitable 20 years ago. Stanley's encounters with women seem not to be patterned on life as much as on movies like "Finders Keepers, Lovers Weepers." Women rampant leave him exhausted, and exhaustion, more than anything else, is the basis of his sentimental education.Of the women in the film, two are memorable: Dianne Hull, who manages to act the role of a sweet, dull girl without ever being dull, and Holly Near, who plays a big fat girl with the unfinished facial features of an irritable 6-year-old and the sexual hungers of Catherine of Russia. The film is the first theatrical feature directed by Leonard Horn, who comes from television where, among other things, he directed segments of "Mannix" and "Mission: Impossible." He's been a bad boy and someone should take away his zoom lens.
Representative Richard Max McCarthy's nominating petitions were upheld yesterday, without a signature to spare. 
ROME, May 26—Secretary of State William P. Rogers endorsed today proposals by European allies of the United States foria mutual and balanced reduction of the forces of the Atlantic alliance and the Warsaw pact in central Eu rope.
JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 23 —Peace and stability have settled over this archipelago na tion of some 120 million people.
WASHINGTON, May 26 — President Nixon told leaders of the building trades and long shoremen's unions of New York today that he had found their public demonstrations of sup port for his Vietnam policy reassuring and “very meaning ful.” 
WASHINGTON, May 27—An official of the Nixon Adminis tration raised the threat today that the President would veto any measure on Cambodia en acted by Congress that re stricted his constitutional powers as Commander in Chief. 
Liberal Party Backing in Democratic Primary
WASHINGTON, May 27— State Department officials dis closed today that the South Vietnamese and Thai Govern ments were empowered to turn over to the Cambodian Army military equipment that had been supplied by the Unit ed States. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 27—The foreign ministers of South Vietnam and Cam bodia signed documents here today giving South Vietnam a broad and open‐ended mandate for military operations in Cam bodia. 
Arthur J. Goldberg took time out yesterday from his own campaign yesterday to aid an antiwar Roman Catholic priest in Bosfon in his bid to take the Democratic nomination away from an incumbent Con gressman generally favorable to President Nixon's policies on Vietnam. 
Fifty members of the Young Republican and Young Demo cratic Cubs of New York City voted last night at a joint meet ing here to support two Senate bills aimed at ending American involvement in Southeast Asia.
WASHINGTON, May 27— Friends of Sargent Shriver are trying to persuade him to accept a new national role as campaign speaker and fund raiser for the election of liberal antiwar Democrats to Congress He was said to be undecided.
CHICAGO, May 27 — The general assembly of the 3.2‐ million‐member United Presby terian Church overwhelmingly approved today a campaign to raise more than $70‐million to be used its “depressed areas and among deprived people.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 27—South Vietnamese troops will continue to operate in Cambodia for an indefinite period after United States units are withdrawn and will require continued American logistical and combat support to sustain those operations, President Nguyen Van Thieu has de clared. 
STOCKHOLM, May 27—The new United States Ambassador to Sweden, Dr. Jerome H. Hol land, is winning applause here for his spirited efforts to repair Swedish‐American relations de spite the eggs and epithets hurled against him by youthful eictremists. 
WASHINGTON, May 27 —A Pentagon spokesman said today that two American fighter‐bombers attacked anti aircraft gun sites in North Viet nam on Monday after a recon naissance plane they were es corting had been fired on about 90 miles north of the demili tarized zone.
WASHINGTON, May 27— President Suharto of Indonesia declared today that “other for eign troops” must be prevented from replacing those of the United States as Americans withdraw from the Asian main land.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 27—American soldiers were re ported today to be recruiting ethnic Cambodian residents of the Mekong delta for fighting in Cambodia. 
WASHINGTON, May 27—A month has passed since Presi dent Nixon ordered American troops into Cambodia and there are now three quite different views here about how his Ad ministration is reacting to the turmoil that ensued. 
As antiwar demonstrations continued on some campuses yesterday, a student group in Washington announced plans for demonstrations in several cities on Memorial Day and a drive to spread the protest movement beyond the colleges and universities into union halls, military installations and migrant labor camps. 
Senator Jacob K. Javits caller yesterday for an acceleration of the United States withdrawal from Vietnam and termed it “the biggest single thing the Administration could do” to re store business confidence and reverse the economic down trend.
ATLANTIC CITY, May 27— The Amalgamated. Clothing Workers of America today criticized Vice President Agnew for public statements that the union contended threatened dissent, free speech and free dom of the press. 
ROME, May 27 (AP)—Pope Paul VI told a group of United States servicemen en route home from Vietnam today: “We want to tell you how much we have prayed in favor of peace and how we want to see the end of the war and the affirma tion of love.” 
American labor, like the nation at large, is divided in its views on the war in Vietnam and President Nixon's policies toward ending it. Jacob Potofsky, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America, this week described the American involve ment in Southeast Asia as a mortal threat to the nation's democratic processes; two days later, leaders of the building trades, longshoremen's and other unions called on Mr. Nixon to praise his military policies and promise continuing demonstrations in their support.
Following is the transcript of President Nixon's remarks at the Billy Graham Rally in Knoxville, Tenn., last night, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of A.B.C. News:
WASHINGTON, May 28— Arthur F. Burns has pledged that the Federal Reserve Board, acting as a “lender of last re sort,” would not let the econo my collapse because of a short age of ready funds in banks or other financial institutions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 28 — The allied com mands reported today that American combat deaths de clined by 35 per cent last week while the number of South Vietnamese soldiers killed rose by 25 per cent.
WASHINGTON, May 28 (AP)—Senator J. W. Ful bright, describing Vice Presi dent Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam as “an Asian Ag new,” charged today that Sai gon's leaders were determined “to keep the Americans mired in the swamp” of Cambodia.
The approximately 1,700 members of the Ohio National Guard remaining on the recent ly embattled Ohio State Uni versity campus were withdrawn last night, after a day in which student demonstrators pelted them with marshmallows.
ATLANTIC CITY, May 28— Senator Edmund S. Muskie to day accused the Nixon Admin istration of dividing the nation and threatening democracy by its military and economic policies.
HUNTINGTON, L. I., May 28 — Vice President Agnew sought to reassure the financial community today by predicting that “1970 is going to be a good year for business, with an upturn in the second half.”
Transcript of Nixon's speech is printed on Page 8.
PLAINFIELD, Ind., May 27 —In the Buick showroom, a salesman was listening with affability and patience—atti tudes that sometimes wear thin in this rigidly conserva tive town—as a long‐haired young customer in shorts and sandals, expounded on the dangers of pollution. Above their heads a cardboard sign spun in the air conditioning cur rents, periodically displaying the message that the 1970 Buick was “Something To Believe In.”
The Vietnam wars of this century, involving Japa riese, French, Americans and Vietnamese, have left more than enough ruins in Indochina. These ruins we could do without; but there is one ruin, from another century, that we could not do without. It is of course Angkor Wat, potentially endangered by extension of the war into Cambodia.
Misha Dichter, pianist; Itzhak Pearlman, violinist, and Walter Trampler, violist, will appear in a concert Monday night at the Juilliard Theater at Lincoln Center for the benefit of the National Coalition for a Re sponsible Congress, the anti Vietnam war organization. The performers will be supported by the Juilliard Theater Orches tra.
Extension of the Indochina war to Cambodia has been sharply criticized by one of the most important Asian leaders friendly to the United States.
SST Recommendations.
The State Department's legal adviser yesterday defended the American invasion of Cambodia as legitimate self‐defense, legal under international law.
PARIS, May 28—A high aide to Prince Norodom Sihanouk appealed here today for Soviet support for the Cambodian in surgent movement.
The Association of the Bar of the City of New York last night passed a vigorously de bated resolution urging the im mediate withdrawal of Ameri can forces from Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 28 (Reuters)—The police used tear gas today to fore stall two student demonstra tions, and some of the stu dents retaliated by throwing stones and firebombs.
WASHINGTON, May 28 — The Army charged two junior officers today with attempted murder in connection with a 1969 incident in South Vietnam in which an American platoon was allegedly directed to fire at some huts for “target prac tice.”
Federal Judge Constance Baker Motley last night issued an order obliging every mem ber of the Police Department to protect antiwar demon strators here against “actual or threatened physical harm” dur ing the Memorial Day weekend.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 28 —North Vietnamese troops are reportedly conduct ing an intensive recruiting and proselytizing campaign among the rural population of Cam bodia in what official sources here see as an attempt to cre ate a broadly based Communist guerrilla organization similar to the Vietcong in South Vietnam.
Alfred Kazin, the author and literary critic, denounced yes terday what he called the “flag business,” the use of the Ameri can flag by construction work ers and others as a patriotic symbol against war dissenters.
SAN FRANCISCO, May 29 (AP)—For the first time, stu dent protest on University of California campuses encom passes a majority of the aca demic community, the system's president, Charles H. Hitch, said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, May 30—More than 1,000 South Vietnamese ma rines battled North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops today in the besieged Cambodian town of Preyveng, 30 miles south east of Pnompenh. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 29—Heour Lay Inn is the Na tional Assembly Deputy from Snoul and Chhlong, his native town. He cannot go home to his district because the ruins of Snoul, leveled and captured by the Americans earlier this month, are inaccessible from here and the Vietnamese Com munists hold Chhlong. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 29—The allied military campaign in Cambodia is a month old. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit nullified a Federal District Court order yesterday that would have required the city's Police Department to remind every member of the force this weekend of his duty to protect antiwar demonstrators from physical assaults and threats. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 29 (UPI) — Several thousand students today staged the big gest anti‐Government demon stration in recent weeks at the state funeral of Phan Khac Suu, a former South Vietnam ese Chief of State. 
Miss Alexandra Brenda Russell, granddaughter of the 10th Duke of Marlborough and a descenant of Commo dore Cornelius Vanderbilt, was married here yesterday to Specialist 5 Timothy Campbell Birch, whose Army service has included duty in Vietnam. 
SAIGON, May 29 (AP)—Some 200 disabled veterans tempo rarily occupied offices of the Veterans' Ministry here today. 
SCRANTON, Pa., May 29 (AP) — The father of an Army captain charged with attempted murder “of an unspecified num ber of human beings” in Viet nam says the charges are ri diculous. 
SAN. FRANCISCO, May 29 —An eyewitness to a shooting incident in South Vietnam that led yesterday to charges of at tempted murder against two Army officers said today that he and other soldiers saw ci vilians moving around a clus ter of huts in the Mekong Delta before the huts were fired on for “target practice.” 
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman adviser to the Radical Jewish Union of Columbia University and 22‐year‐old Annie Rosen a member of the union, were arrested last evening after they disrupted services at Temple Emanu‐El. They were charged with interfering with a wor ship service. 
WASHINGTON, May 29 (UPI)—The Democratic Nation al Chairman, Lawrence F. O'Brien, accused the Nixon Ad ministration of a negative, foot dragging attitude toward Con gressional efforts to improve the lot of Vietnam war vet erans. 
HONG KONG, May 29 — Prince Norodom Sihanouk said in Hanoi yesterday that while in office he had given to “the Vietnamese people fighting against the United States im perialists an effective support and assistance that is not verb al.” 
The cancellation by the United States Court of Appeals of a lower court order requiring the New York Police Department to fulfill its legal obligation to protect anti‐war demonstrators on this Memorial Day weekend removes an unwarranted slur on the entire police foree—one that was particularly unfor tunate in a week when two young policemen were brutally killed in the line of duty. 
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., May 29—After nearly seven weeks of almost continuing crisis, President Nixon settled in here today for a vacation weekend at his Western White House. 
TOPEKA, Kan., May 29 (AP) —The Kansas Board of Regents informed Gov. Robert Docking today that there would be no special seating section or recog nition for peace advocates at commencement exercises Mon day at the University of Kansas. 
To Back President
HAMBURG VILLAGE, N. Y., May 30— W. Fleming, former associate dean of the University of Buffalo Law School and now the university's advocate, was arrested here this afternoon and charged with descrating the flag. 
To the Editor: Though I agree far more often than not with the Vice President, I submit that his ulti mate glory lies in an unblem ished sense of personal integ rity that by all rights should have been defeated long ago. Defeated by those who see in his presence a reminder of that which they themselves have be trayed and compromised many times over through their eva sions, half‐lies, Inconsistencies, unyieldinc, conformity to dog ma—in short, an intellectual hypocrisy of the worst sort. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 30 (AP)—Army surgeons have removed an enemy bul let from the heart of a 20 year‐old American soldier. Pfc. Donald H. Light of Red bud, 1ll., who was wounded in Cambodia Tuesday, was reported in good condition today and was able to talk with members of his family by telephone. 
WASHINGTON, May 30 (UPI)—More than 30 Reserve Officers Training Corps build ings have been fire‐bombed on campuses this term by antiwar protesters, and the Defense De Dartment is worried. 
WASHINGTON — Over breakfast table in the National Press Club, an Administration of ficial last week told a small group of reporters something that the White House has not yet told its own Republican Sen ators — namely, that the White House saw no compromise pos sible on the restrictive Cambo dian amendment before the Sen ate. 
Howard J. Samuels, cam paigning yesterday at the Brooklyn beaches with his wife, Bobbi, and their four daugh ters, aged 11 to 24, urged that hereafter Memorial Day be ob served also as “a national day of sanity” in which the genera tions would communicate with each other. Mr. Samuels, who isseeking the Democrat ic nomination for Gov ernor, read to picnick ing crowds at Man hattan and Brighton Beaches and at Coney Island a statement he had sent to the Memorial Day Peace Ac tion Coalition. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 30(Reuters) — Universities and colleges in Saigon will resume classes on Monday after having been closed for more than three weeks, the Saigon radio an nounced today. 
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., May 30—President Nixon summoned his ranking military advisers today for a full‐scale review of the Cambodian operation and his program to turn the war over to the South Vietnamese. 
Three months ago Senator Charles E. Goodell took a poll that evaluated his potential Democratic opponents and found that 63 per cent of the state's enrolled Democrats had never heard of Richard L. Ot Unger. An Ottin2er poll turn weeks ago showed that 63 per cent had not only heard of him, but knew he was a Congress man running for Senator and was against the war in Vietnam and pollution of the Hudson River and was for Israel and old people.
Pleas for better treatment of veterans and for “sanity” in the discussion of national prob lems were voiced by political candidates yesterday as they intensified their campaigns on Memorial Day. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam. May 30—Enemy troops attacked the mountain resort city of Dalat and surrounding military posts early this morning. It was the most serious attack since the Tet offensive in early 1968. 
President Nixon is understandably anxious to show that he is able to speak face‐to‐face to the nation's youth. His early morning stroll among student dem onstrators at the recent peace rally in Washington fitted into that effort; his address to the Billy Graham meeting in the football stadium at the University Tennessee was a more spectacular appeal to a massed audience of young America. 
SAIGON—In a small ante chamber just off the main en trance to South Vietnam's For eign Ministry building last week, the Foreign Ministers of Cam bodia and South Vietnam signed a series of documents reopen ing diplomatic relations between the two neighbors after a lapse of seven years. 
MONTICELLO, N.Y., May 30 —The first event chalked on the board at the patio at the Evans Hotel in Loch Sheldrake today was a golf tournament at 10; the second was, “Yoga: wear shorts.” at 11. 
In a suite at Washington's Madison Hotel Wednesday evening, a group of Wall Street chieftains got to gether to talk about the day's events. Their host was Bernard J. Lasker, chairman of New York Stock Ex change's Board of Gover nors, and all of them were about to attend a White House dinner. 
TOKYO, Sunday, May 31 (AP) — Prince Norodom Siha nouk, ousted March 18 as Cam bodia's Chief of State, says forces loyal to him would have captured Pnompenh, the Cam bodian capital, if United States and South Vietnamese forces had not intervened, the Com munist Chinese press agency, Hsinhua, reported today. 
Two Memorial Day parades, widely separated in ideology, were held here yesterday to honor America's war dead. 
PARIS—Just one month ago the President announced that American ground forces had been ordered into Cambodia. At that time I wrote: “If Nixon can swiftly smash the sanctu aries outside Vietnam without dangerous escalation or con frontations elsewhere, he will ultimately emerge triumphant at home as well as overseas. Nothing succeeds like success but, if he fails, nothing fails like failure.” 
The Army, which accounts for more Vietnam war casual ties than any other service, reports that more than 81 per cent of its wounded are sur viving in Vietnam, compared with 74 per cent in the Korean War and 71 per cent in World War II. 
WASHINGTON, May 30— Senior officials of the Nixon Administration are reportedly moving to the conclusion that Cambodia will need increasing military assistance from South Vietnam and Thailand, includ ing troops from South Vietnam at least. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, May 30 — South Vietnam is seeking up to $200‐million in emergency aid from the United States to help tide it over an economic crisis caused by severe inflation at a time of its increasing commitment in Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, May 31 (AP)—The Cambodian radio said today that martial law would go into effect in Cambodia tomorrow and that heavy prison terms or death sentences would be im posed for a long list of crimes. 
AMHERST, Mass., May 30 (AP) — Kingman Brewster Jr., president of Yale, spoke at the 100th commencement of the University of Massachusetts to day. He used Memorial Day as his theme and the division of opinion over the Indochina war as an example of patriotism. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, May 30 (AP)—Almost every village in Cambodia has a church in it. The Catholic Church of Notre Dame on the banks of the Bassac River has a village in it.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia—The Cambodian military units in the southern region are insignifi cant in numbers compared to the South Vietnamese troops engaged there, a high official close to Premier Lon Nol said the other day, but at least they can act as gendarmes. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 31—The Government disclosed today that it had renewed an earlier appeal to the Soviet Union and Britain, co‐chairmen of the Geneva Conference of 1954, to send the International Control Commission back to investigate its charge that North Vietnam and the Viet cong were stepping up their military activities against Cam bodia. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 31 —in an unexpected show of strength, Laotian troops have driven North Vietnamese sol diers from several hilltop posi tions overlooking Sam Thong and re‐entered the mountain valley town, 80 miles northeast of here, it was reported today. 
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 31—A military court sentenced First Lieut. James B. Duffy to six months in confine ment today in what the court decided was the involuntary manslaughter of an unarmed Vietnamese prisoner. 
WASHINGTON, March 31— The Supreme Court said today that trial judges could have dis ruptive defendants bound and gagged, jailed for contempt of court or expelled from court if such measures were necessary to preserve order. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 1—A United States Navy F‐4 Phantom jet fighter‐intercepter shot down a North Vietnamese MIG‐21 jet fighter over North Vietnam last Saturday, spokesmen for the United States military com mand reported yesterday.
Vietnam: Moral Issue
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, April 1—The South Vietnamese Army's penetration of Cambodian territory last week has caused considerable concern among United States diplomats here. 
WASHINGTON, March 31— Pentagon officials said today that they expected President Nixon to announce further troop withdrawals from South Vietnam sometime in April, de spite reports that some top military men were urging a delay in the next phase of the withdrawals.
Mayor Lindsay will speak at a Vietnam peace rally April 15 in Bryant Park, the Vietnam Moratorium and Peace Parade Committees announced yester day. Mr. Lindsay's office said the Mayor had accepted the in vitation of the organizers.
MANILA, March 31 President Ferdinand E. Marcos has called the issue of American funding of the Philippine contingent to Vietnam an internal quarrel be tween the two political parties in the United States who were “dragging in the Philippines.” 
A group of 134 young lawyers from Wall Street firms have signed a petition asking for an investigation and possible censure and removal of Federal Judge Julius J. Hoff man, who conducted the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial. 
PNOMPENH, March 31—A brother of Lieut. Gen. Lon Nol, the Cambodian Premier, was stabbed to death last Saturday at his home in Chup, near the troubled city of Kompong Chain, by a gang of Vietnamese rubber plantation workers. 
President Nixon's Vietnamization program is ap proaching a critical test of credibility this month as the third phase of announced American troop with drawals from Southeast Asia nears completion. 
WASHINGTON, April 1— Capt. Ernest L. Medina was ac cused by the Army today of being “responsible” for the mur der of Vietnamese civilians al legedly killed by members of his infantry company in the vil lage of Songmy two years ago.
BOSTON, April 1—The Mas sachusetts legislature gave final approval and sent to the Gov ernor today a bill intended to force a court test of the con stitutionality of the war in Vietnam.
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 1— Laotian forces were reported to have strengthened their hold on Sam Thong today as North Vietnamese troops pulled back from the mountain valley town they captured two weeks ago but lost to counterattacking Laotian troops yesterday.
“The conduct and language of the petitioners... he unending villification heaped upon the Court, the almost uninterrupted flow of vile, demeaning, vicious, base and threatening language shouted by the peti tioners...must be unparalleled in court history.”
PARIS, April 1—The French Government called tonight for a general conference on Indo china to make the area as a whole “a zone of neutrality and peace.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 1—After six months of relative quiet, the Vietnam war flared up again today with a coordinated series of enemy shelling and ground attacks against American and South Vietnamese targets throughout the country.
GROSSINGER, N. Y., April 1 —Embattled New York Demo crats, badly divided on a state ticket, received for considera tion today a state platform that includes proposals for re structuring the state govern ment.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 1—A Government spokesman, asked today if concerted actions between Cambodia and Am erican or South Vietnamese troops were being carried out or envisaged, said that the answer was negative as far as South Vietnam was concerned but that he preferred not to comment on the United States ??
WASHINGTON, April I (UPI) —The Defense Department to day identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in action in Vietnam:
April 1 (AP)—Brig. Gen. Wil liam R. Bond, commander of the United States 199th Light Infantry Brigade, was killed by enemy small‐arms fire today. He was the fifth American gen eral killed in action in the Viet nam war the four others died in aircraft crashes.
WASHINGTON, April 2—Sen ator J. W. Fulbright said today that President Nixon's policy for Vietnam was not working, predicted that it would lead to a major disaster if it continued, and urged the President to reach a political settlement in Viet nam and in Laos and Cambo dia, the former French Indo china, this year.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 2—The new leadership of Cambodia released today 486 persons described as all the remaining political prison ers jailed by the ousted Chief of State, Prince Norodom Si hanouk. In a ceremony, outside the National Assembly, the prisoners—including old men, women and children born in jail—were pronounced “patriots whose revolt against abuses, corruption and the absence of all social justice was fully justified.” They were given mimeographed documents bearing their thumbprints and attesting their release. Prisoners from the provinces were given the equivalent of $i or $2 for bus fare home. The prisoners applauded the announcement loudly and joined in a Gov ernment ‐ sponsored cheer: “Long live Lon Nol! Long live Sirik Matak! Long live Cheng Heng!” The three leaders are the Premier, First Deputy Premier and Pro visional Chief of State, who deposed Prince Sihanouk. They did not attend the cere mony. The Government, rep resented by Trinh Hoanh, secretary general of the National Committee of Salvation — the movement that overthrew the Prince two weeks ago—and deputies and ministers used the occasion to impress on the freed prisoners and the several thou sand spectators that the new leaders were restoring rights that Prince Sihanouk, “intoxi cated with personal power,” had unjustly abrogated.
“The only time the American people ever see a Vietnam casualty is when he's got blood running out of him on the Cronkite program. After that, he's forgotten.”
PARIS, April 2—North Viet nam, the Vietcong and the Sai gon delegation to the peace talks took a reserved attitude today toward a French sugges tion for a general conference on peace and neutrality in Indo china.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 2 (AP)—A wave of heavy en emy attacks that struck across South Vietnam for two days ebbed tonight, and the United States command said the worst of the fighting appeared to be over.
WASHINGTON, April 2 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been hilted in Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, April 2— President Nixon asked Congress today for a $65‐million increase in the Veterans Administra tion's budget for health care to expand medical programs for the increasing number of Vietnam veterans.
WASHINGTON, April 2—Two weeks after the overthrow of Prince Sihanouk in Cambodia, this capital does not know whether that country is drifting toward civil war or coming under solidified and “friendlier” rule.
MANILA, Friday, April 3—A committee of the Philippine Senate investigating the use of United States funds for a Philippine group in South Viet nam has agreed to begin with an inquiry into possible secret agreements between the Philip pines and United States.
WASHINGTON, April 2— Antiwar protesters announced today the beginning of a na tional drive to force Govern ment‐sponsored projects involv ing counterinsurgency off the campuses and eventually out of existence.
Stockholders of the Chase Manhattan Corporation, meet ing yesterday afternoon under extraordinary security arrange ments, peppered David Rocke feller with an assortment of questions and protests that turned the annual meeting into a noisy—though orderly— forum dealing largely with international affairs.
BOSTON, April 2 — Gov. Francis W. Sargent signed today a bill challenging the le gality of the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 2—A march on Washington is sched uled for Saturday to support “victory over the Communists in Vietnam.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 3— The mother of one United States airman and the wives of three others shot down in the Vietnam war were told to day at the North Vietnamese Embassy that none of the men had ever been prisoners of war in North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, April 3— According to authoritative re ports reaching here, the prin cipal Communist political and military headquarters for South Vietnam was hurriedly moved late last month from Cambodia to South Vietnamese territory. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 3—Nearly one out of five front‐line soldiers surveyed in an elite American combat unit in South Vietnam said re cently that they smoked mari juana at least once a day, according to an Army physi cian's study. 
BOSTON, April 3 (UPI)—Two Federal courts rejected today the first attempt by a Massa chusetts serviceman to bring suit under a new law challeng ing the President's authority to commit troops to combat zones such as Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 3 (AP) — The United States infantrymen pursuing an enemy battalion toward the Cambodian border encountered heavy resistance today, and contact continued into the night, field reports said.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 3—The new leaders of Cam bodia plan to proclaim a re public soon, probably this month, one of them said to day. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 3 (Reuters)—Some 60, 000 students from four South Vietnamese universities will boycott lectures indefinitely to protest the detention of 41 students, without trial, a spokesman said today. 
WASHINGTON April 4— The Student Mobilization Commit tee to End the War in Vietnam says it expects hundreds of thousands of high school and college students to stay away front classees on April 15 and to demonstrate against United States involvement in South east Asia.
WASHINGTON, April 4— About 50,000 people marched up Pennsylvania Avenue to a rally at the Washington Monu ment today to advocate “vic tory in Vietnam.”
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 4—South Vietnam, torn by war, looks like a haven to most Vietnamese living in Cambodia.
WASHINGTON—The impor tance of the Massachusetts Legislature's bold challenge to the war in Vietnam is not that the Supreme Court is likely to rule that this “undeclared war” is an unconstitutional exercise of Presidential power. It is rather that the Massachusetts bill is the longest official step yet taken in making war resist ance acceptable and legitimate. That means it is bound to be come even more effectively political. 
BAVET, Cambodia, April 3— Three Americans checking re ports of Vietcong presence around: this Cambodian border town halted their car here this afternoon to wait while about a dozen men—identified by vil lagers as Vietcong—crossed the road in single file 200 yards ahead.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 4—Pham Van Dan, 29 years old, has been out of the South Vietnamese. Infantry Rangers for nearly five years, but he still wears his uniform and his eyes reddened slightly the other day when he was asked why.
The labor scene came apart in a big way last week, with more turbulence in more key sectors than the country had experienced in any single period since 1946. A few of the worst trouble spots had been smoothed out by week's end, but the price of peace was extremely high—so high that it threatened to give extra bounce to the upsurge in living costs that caused most of the strikes in the first place.
WASHINGTON — For years there have been hints from the Supreme Court that even the guardians of the First Amend ment are not immune to a natu ral law of dissent—that one's toleration of noisy protest tends to be in inverse ratio to one's distance from it. 
BEIRUT, Lebanon, April 4 —The voyage last week of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian commando leader, to Pe king and Hanoi is part of the commando movement's grow ing role in international of fairs.
IN 1944, the United States Govern ment tried 30 American Nazis and Fascists for undermining the mo rale of our armed forces then at war. Among the defendants were Gerhard Wilhelm Kunze, Fritz Kuhn's succes sor as head of the German‐American Bund; Elizabeth Dilling, who had attended Hitler's giant 1938 Nurem berg rally; George Sylvester Viereck, a German agent; William Dudley Pelley, head of the Silver Shirts move ment; Joseph E. McWilliams, head of the Christian Mobilizers; Lawrence Dennis, self‐styled Nazi, who insisted on defending himself, and others. They had published leaflets hailing Hitler as a savior, and denouncing President Roosevelt as a Jew and warmonger. This printed material was being disseminated among American troops by devious means. 
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, April 4 — Interviews held here today with a number of com hut infantrymen completing duty in Vietnam provided no easy explanation why some Americans kill defenseless pris oners of war and others do not.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, April 5—The allied com mands reported yesterday the heaviest fighting involving American troops along the de militarized zone in nearly five months and new clashes near the Cambodian border.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 4—The United States First Infantry Division dis played its colors in South Vietnam for the last time yes terday, but the division has left its mark on South Vietnamese soil for years to come.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 4—The official Cambodia press agency has published a tran script of the news conference held Monday by Premier Lon Nol in which the Premier's words have been changed to raise the possibility that Cam bodia might call for United States troops to help her expel North Vietnamese and Viet cong troops from her territory.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 4 (Reuters)—The Civilian bureau chief of Pacific Stars and Stripes in Saigon said to day that he had been dis charged for having permitted a Army newsman to send a critical article on military cen sorship to The New York Times.
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 4— A North Vietnamese counter attack launched before dawn this morning is threatening the Laotian hold on Sam Thong, re taken Tuesday after having been under North Vietnamese control for two weeks.
To the Editor: The President's message on school desegregation has been subject to widely differing in terpretations. The reason for these differences, I believe, is that the message takes two major policy positions, which go in opposite directions. 
WASHINGTON—That war just will not go away. 
President Nixon was urged by an arms control group yes terday to propose to the Soviet Union a two‐year interim halt in deployment of strategic weapons while the two sides attempted to work out an agreement to stop the nuclear arms race.
France's proposal for a new international conference to deal with the “indivisible” problems of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia offers the Nixon Administration another chance—perhaps a last chance—to move from confrontation to negotiation in Indochina before a wider war engulfs the entire area of the former French colonial empire. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 5— Cambodia rallied her high school and college students today to the cause of loving their new leaders and hating the Vietnamese Communists. The young peo ple took to it with ferocious slogans, cruel posters, the singing of new patriotic songs; disorganized close order drill and embarrassed giggles. Even the teachers who gave the orders were often too busy squelching their amusement to get out the words that would make their classes execute a “right face” or stand at ease. The lan guage of the posters that be gan to spring up on trees and walls and across streets all over town was strong.
Font's Decision
The Administration's decision to stay out of Cam bodian politics serves the best interests of Cambodia, Vietnam and, not least, the United States. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 5 — H. Ross Perot, the Texas mil lionaire, returned to Vientiane today in a Boeing 707 jetliner, full of journalists, to continue his campaign to induce the North Vietnamese to improve the treatment of United States prisoners of war. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, April 6—South Viet namese troops penetrated neer ly 10 miles into Cambodia yes terday, reliable military sources said today. 
TOKYO, Monday, April 6 (Reu ters) — Col. William V. Koch, the editor in chief of the author ized American Army newspaper, Stars and Stripes, the Pacific edition, said here today the newspaper's Saigon bureau chief would be reassigned to Tokyo later this week “as a routine change.”
SPRINGFIELD, Ill., April 6 (UPI)—Legislation authorizing Illinois servicemen to refuse duty in the Vietnam war will be introduced next week in th General Assembly. The bill, patterned after a ??milar one passed in Massachusetts last week, will be introduced in thel House by Representative Robert E. Mann. Democratic og Chi cago. 
PARIS, April 6—French dip lomats have been active in number of capitals to advance the proposal by France last Wednesday for general peace negotiations involving all the countries concerned with Indo china. 
CHIPHOU, Cambodia, April 6 — Two Japanese television newsmen were captured by the Vietcong well inside Cambodia today during the Government sponsored tour to show to for eign correspondends the extent of Vietnamese Communist penetration into this country. 
WASHINGTON, April 6 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 6—Four enemy ground as saults were reported by allied spokesmen in the last 36 hours. In addition, 41 enemy shelling attacks were reported for the 24‐hour period ending at 8 A.M. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 6— H. Ross Perot, the Dallas bil lionaire who is trying to get better treatment for. American prisoners held by Hanoi, staged a seven‐and‐a‐half‐hour sit‐in near the North Vietnamese Em bassy here today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 6 (AP)—Scores of dis abled war veterans battled policemen with stones, bot tles, clubs and hammers to day near South Vietnam's Presidential Palace. 
PITTSBURGH, April 6 (UPI) —A young man who was upset because he thought he was being flown to Boston entered the cockpit of Trans World Airlines Flight 90 with a gun today, but was dis armed and the plane landed here without incident. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 6 — A student protest movement is rapidly gathering momentum in South Vietnam despite Government efforts to stifle it. 
WASHINGTON, April 6 (AP) —The Supreme Court today sustained the power of police to arrest street speakers who refuse orders to move on when crowds grow tense and hostile. 
SPRINGFIELD, Mass., April 6—A former. Army helicopter pilot charged today that an Army major killed 33 unarmed men, women and children as they ran across an open field in a 1967 incident in the Cen tral Highlands of South Viet nam. 
WASHINGTON, April 7 (Reuters) — President Nixon will announce a decision this month on the next United States troop cut in Vietnam, the White House said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 7—Several companies of national policemen con tinued to patrol the down town streets of Saigon to night after clashing with 100 disabldd South Vietnamese veterans.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 7—Vietnamese Communist mili tary pressure on the Cambodian border province of Svayrieng increased last night and this morning and brought heavy fighting.
WASHINGTON, April 7 (UPI) —President Nixon presented the nation's highest award for bravery today to the families of 21 American servicemen killed in Vietnam.
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 7— H. Ross Perot, the Dallas bil lionaire, was again re buffed by Communist represen tatives here today in his cam paign to represent the interests of military prisoners in the Vietnam war.
A coalition of black political and social activists demanded yesterday that President Nixon authorize a “fact‐finding team composed of our elected offi cials and a local community resident” to investigate the im prisonment in Vietnam of a black soldier accused of as sault and resisting arrest. 
The criticism leveled against Judge Carswell recalls that made against Louis Brandeis, nominated by Woodrow Wilson in January 1916, and confirmed several weeks later after much bitter debate. The New York Sun wrote that Brandeis was “utterly and even ridiculously unfit.” The New York Press called the nomination “an in sult to members of the Supreme Court.” Opposition was also voiced by The Boston Trahs script and The New York Times. 
ALEXANDRIA, Va., April 7 (AP)—The wife of Senator Philip A. Hart, Democrat of Michigan, and seven leaders of a “Mass for Peace” in the Pentagon were found guilty today of violating Federal regulations governing use of the building.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 7—The enemy's country side upsurge on the battlefield appeared to be waning today after six days of intense fight ing.
WASHINGTON, April 7 (AP) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemfen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 9 (AP)—Enemy attacks killed 754 South Viet namese soldiers last week, the highest weekly Government toll in more than two years and the second highest of the war, South Vietnamese headquar ters announced today. 
VIENTIANE, April 8 — Long after many observers here had expected the twin towns to fall, Laotian forces today were still holding off North Vietnamese attacks against Sam Thong and Long Tieng, 70 to 80 miles northeast of Vientiane. 
WASHINGTON, April 8 (AP) —The Defense Department to day identified the follow ing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in action in Vietnam:
Sixteen years of broken promises on land reform provide warrant for skepticism about the new legisla tion President Thieu has signed, yet there is now more reason than before to believe that tenant farming at last will be virtually ended in South Vietnam. 
Orderly Process
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, April 8—This is probably the first war in American history in which the Army cleans off its battlefields and sells the scrap to the highest bidder as it fights. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 8 (Reuters) — Premier Tran Thien Khiem told the Sen ate today that President Nguy yen Van Thieu intended to send legislation to Parliament to en able him to govern by decree.
WASHINGTON, April 8— Senator Marlow W. Cook of Kentucky, who held one of three Republican votes crucial for the confirmation of Judge G. Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court, said today that he finally decided to vote against confirmation after at tending a White House cere mony yesterday for the post humous presentation of 21 Medals of Honor.
Arthur J. Goldberg, candi date for the Democratic nomi nation for Governor, urged yes terday that New York legis lators support a bill that ques tions the right of the Admin istration to send conscript troops to Vietnam. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Thursday, April 9 — Official sources said that Cambodian troops killed 300 Vietcong early today after a late‐night ambush between the town of Svayrieng and Prasot, 16 miles from the border with South Vietnam. 
PRINCETON, N. J., April 8— Public approval of President Nixon's performance dropped; to a new low just before he dispatched troops to move the mail in New York City, the Gallup poll said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 9—Allied forces in South Vietnam suffered their highest number of combat deaths last week in nearly a year, accord ing to official reports today. 
GENEVA, April 9 — The World Council of Churches said today that it had con tributed $25,000 toward a recent shipment of 16 tons of medical supplies and equipment to the provisional revolutionary government of the vietcong in South Vi etnam. 
WASHINGTON, April 9—The White House announced today that President Nixon would re port to the nation on Vietnam in a nationally televised ad dress next Thursday. 
PARIS, April 9 — Twenty five newsmen covering the Vietnam peace talks here ap pealed to the four delegations today to do what they could to establish the whereabouts and to obtain the release of 10 journalists missing in Laos and Cambodia while on assignment. 
While South Vietnamese troops have been extending their operations into Cambodia in contravention of declared American policy, a new incident has raised similar questions about Washington's control over allied military activities elsewhere in Southeast Asia. That incident was a recent air action over North Viet nam in which an American fighter‐interceptor, escort ing an unarmed reconnaissance plane, shot down a North Vietnamese MIG‐21. 
Reports from Saigon indicate that substantial num bers of South Vietnamese troops have been fighting alongside Cambodian forces against North Vietnamese and Vietcong units in Cambodia. 
PARIS, April 9 — Le Duc Tho, a member of the polit buro of North Vietnam's Work ers' (Communist) party and a key figure in the negotiations that led to the agreement to hold peace talks, will return to Hanoi tomorrow without hav ing made contact with the American delegation during his stay here of more than two months. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 9 — The Cambodian military authorities have withdrawn all troops from the tip of the sec tion of Svayrieng Province known as the Parrot's Beak, abandoning it for the time being to the Vietnamese Com munists, according to high mili tary sources. 
Eleven pounds of pure co caine, with a street value of more than $2.5‐million, was seized yesterday afternoon in a raid at a midtown apart ment house. 
VIENTIANE, April 9 (UPI) — Hundreds of North Viet namese troops encircled a Gov ernment outpost northeast of the Plaine des Jarres today and brought it under artillery fire, high‐ranking Laotian military sources said. It was the first confirmed use of artillery by the North Vietnamese in Laos. 
STOCKHOLM, April 9 (Reu ters)—Dr. Jerome H. Holland, the new United States Ambas sador to Sweden, arrived here today and was met by scores of policemen and about 100 demonstrators at the airport. 
WASHINGTON, April 9 (UPI) —The Defense Department en nounced today that Specialist 4 Lawrence C. Bigelow of the Army, who IS from Lake View, L. I., had been killed in action in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, April 9—A spokesman for the Defense De partment, in response to in quiries about an American of ficer seen in Cambodia, said today that military advisers in South Vietnam have been au thorized to cross the border into Cambodia for “protocol” meetings. 
Procedure of Liberals
H. Ross Perot, the Texas bil lionaire who has made two trips to Southeast Asia on be half of American war prison ers, returned from the second trip yesterday and said he be lieved public opinion in the United States could change North Vietnam's views and might even obtain release of some of the 1,500 American prisoners believed to be held in North Vietnam.
NHONTRACH, South Viet nam, April 8 — Phuhol and Nhonthanh are two villages only a few miles apart in the Nhontrach district southeast of Saigon.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 10 — At least 89 Vietnamese civilians, including many wom en and children, were killed late last night during what Cambodian military sources de scribed as a Vietnamese Com munist attack on the border vil lage of Prasot.
WASHINGTON, April 10 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, April 10 (UPI)—The Army today ordered hearings to determine if Capt. Ernest L. Medina will be court martialed on charges in con nection with the alleged mas sacre at Songmy, South Viet nam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 10 (AP)—A South Vietnamese relief battalion fought its way into the American‐led camp at Dakseang today, easing a 10‐ day enemy siege. But to the north near the demilitarized zone, North Vietnamese at tacked another outpost led by American Green Berets.
The Time‐Life News Service said yesterday that representa tives of the North Vietnamese Government and of the Vietcong had agreed to make inquiries into the disappearance of a number of newsmen on assign ment in Laos and Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, April 10— The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted today to re peal the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution, which was fre quently cited by President John son as Congressional authori zation for the United States military involvement in Viet nam.
PARIS, April 10—Le Duc Tho, a member of the North Vetnamese Politburo left here today for Moscow and Hanoi after a two‐month stay. As he left, he warned France against supporting the new leadership in Cambodia.
TRIPOLI, Libya — A young Russian driving his Volga through the twisting streets of Cairo's Garden City district stopped at an intersection and in Arabic asked a policeman for directions to an address where a cocktail party was un derway.
WASHINGTON, April 11—A magazine account of the events at Songmy reports that the American unit involved had begun to mistreat its prison ers and “to be less discriminat ing” about who was or was not a Vietcong months before the alleged massacre.
ANTHANH, South Vietnam, April 11—“Cambodian soldiers came to our house and told us to leave,” Nguyen Van So, a Vietnamese who was born in Cambodia, said in explaining why he fled his homeland 10 days ago and resettled with his wife and nine children in this South Vietnamese border vil lage.
HE believes that the Federal Government must wage war against pollution. He would require trade unions to take in more blacks as members. He is not offend ed by the notion of minimum family. assistance. But for all that, John Ehr lichman, the President's chief adviser on domestic policy, is a Republican and a conservative—not so much be cause he prefers private to public action to solve social problems but because he is conservative in an emo tional, deeply personal sense.
PRINCETON, N. J., April 11— Public confidence in President Nixon's Vetnam policies has de clined steadily since January, according to the latest Gallup, Poll.
WASHLNGTON, April 11 — The latest report of an atrocity by United States troops in Viet nam has produced another in vestigation, according to the Defense Department, but it may be a long time before it yields results.
TANCANH, South Vietnam, April 11 (AP)—The North Viet namese still have 1.500 soldiers around the shell‐battered Spe cial Forces camp at Dakseang, and a South Vietnamese gen eral warned today that new at tacks might conic in a week.
Guilt and Songmy
Arthur J. Goldberg, Demo cratic organization designed for Governor, said in an Interview last week that Governor Rocke feller has been “a good gov ernor but not activist enough.”
WASHINGTON, April 11 (AP) —A Conareasional Investigation of the alleged massacre of South Vietnamese civilians at Mylai will begin Wednesday under strict secrecy.
WASHINGTON. April 11 — Widespread antiwar activities are scheduled for this coming week, culminating on Wednes day, with rallies, leaflet distri bution and demonstrations in more than 200 cities and towns across the nation.
SAIGON. APRIVATE first class whose company was ambushed and mauled by the enemy will know intimately the anthill behind which he hid trying to save his hide, but his mother in Des Moines, Iowa, will probably know more about the whole fight than he does.
WASHINGTON, April 11 — The State Department has de nied permission for Gisela Man del, wife of the Belgian Marxist economist, Ernest Mandel, to enter the United States at the invitation of the Columbia Uni versity Student Mobilization Committee.
PHILADELPHIA, April 11—A new array of major powers is emerging in East Asia and will reduce the chances of big power confrontation there, a prominent political scientist has forecast here.
IT HAPPENED AT BERKELEY
Much has happened since the United States con tracted to sell eight F‐5 jet fighter planes to the friend ly and moderate government of King Idris in Libya a year ago. The King has been deposed by military officers who have cancelled American base rights in that country, allied themselves closely with the United Arab Republic and made Libya one of the most vocif erous champions of military confrontation with Israel. 
HONOLULU, April 8—They drift along on Kalakaua Ave nue in Waikiki on Saturday night, wandering with the crowd and watching the hours slip through their fingers. 
Senator Charles H. Goodell, taking pointed issue with Presi dent Nixon and Governor Rockefeller, his running mate in this year's state election, says he “will not be bound by any Republican consensus in the campaign.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 12 — North Vietnamese troops were reported to have opened a heavy attack today on a second United States Special Forces camp. 
NEWTON, Mass., April 12 (UPI)—A group of housewives announced today a “mass non payment of telephone taxes.” Mrs. Susan Webster, one of the organizers, said the 10 per cent Federal excise tax on interstate telephone calls supports the Vitnam war. She said the wom en would pay their bills without the tax and give the rest to a local educational institution. 
MANILA, April 12—Secretary General Thant of the United Nations said today that “any just and durable solution to the crisis in Southeast Asia can only be found within the Ge neva agreements of 1954 and 1962.” 
The first of this week's planned antiwar demonstra tions in the city began late yesterday afternoon in a pan eled auditorium on the upper West Side, where a group of New Yorkers gathered to be gin a three‐day “fast for peace.”
SVAYRIENG, Cambodia, April 12—A surge of fighting moved to the eastern edge of this pro vincial capital today as Viet namese guerrillas approached the village of Prasot — down Route 1 in the direction of South Vietnam—and a battery of Cambodian 105‐mm. howit zers began firing into the abandoned village from the Svayrieng soccer field. 
BUENOS AIRES, April 12 (AP) — Ten men raided a Coast Guard post 15 miles north of here today, manacled the four men on duty and fled with 30 uniforms and some weapons, the police reported. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 12 (AP)—Maj, Hugh A. Davis, 37 years old, an Air Force pilot assigned to a sup port squadron at Tansonnhut Air Base in Saigon, was found innocent today of smuggling opium from Thailand, but was convicted of illegal possession of United States currency.
NEWARK, Ohio—Representa tive Robert Taft Jr. spent an hour last week touring the Fiberglas plant in this ecntral Ohio city. He peered into the huge machines that spew out in sulating material like pink cot ton candy and learned how the manufacturing process works.
WASHINGTON, April 13 — More than a year ago, a young sailor assigned to the Pentagon expressed his displeasure with military life, and the Navy in particular, by printing an anti war newsletter mocking the service.
JERUSALEM, April 13—Is raeli bombers struck three times today at Egyptian sites described as military installa tions, hitting targets in two sectors of the Nile Delta and along the length of the Suez Canal.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 13 (UPI)—The Cambodian Army rushed reinforcements toward the capital of Svayieng Prov ince, 70 miles southeast of Pnem penh, where reports said a major assault by Vietnamesel. Communists appeared inevita ble.
Choices for Court
FIRE BASE ROHR, South Vietnam, April 12 — American combat troops pushed within about 500 yards of the Cam bodian border today in this densely jungled northwestern corner of Tayninh Province.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 13—An officially inspired cam paign of hatred against Viet namese has reached fever pitch throughout Cambodia. It has re sulted in detentions, in disap pearances and, in at least one known case, in mass killings that witnesses attributed to Cambodian soldiers.
When the new Cambodian leaders sought to dem onstrate the extent of Communist Vietnamese penetration of their country last week by encouraging foreign newsmen to visit border areas, the Commu nists retaliated by seizing eight journalists, including two Americans.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tues day, April 14 (AP)—Four enemy rockets plunged into the heart of Saigon just before last mid night, missing by just a few blocks the United States Em bassy and the official residence of President Nguyen Van Thieu. One of the 100‐pound rockets crashed through the roof of a theater where a play was under way.
SPRINGFIELD, Mass., April 13 (AP) — A 22‐year‐old Vietnam War veteran has issued a print ed statement modifying his story that 33 Vietnamese men, women and children were killed in a 1967 action in South Viet nam.
TRENTON, April 13 (AP)— A bill similar to a Massachu setts law allowing servicemen to refuse to fight in Vietnam was introduced today in the New Jersey Legislature. The bill is sponsored by Assembly man George C. Richardson, Essex County Democrat. Mr. Richardson, a Negro, is the assistant Assembly minority leader and a candidate for Mayor of Newark.
WASHINGTON, April 13 (AP) Tit Defense Department today listed the names of the follow ing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
Following are excerpts from a speech on international af fairs by Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet Communist party leader, as distributed in Eng Iish here by Tass, the official Soviet press agency:
ALBANY, April 14—Liberal Democrats attempted today to give new life in the Legislature to the issue of the war in Vietnam.
STOCKHOLM, April 14 (AP) —The new United States Am bassador, Jerome H. Holland, said today that he was greeted by shouts of “Nigger! Nigger!” by Swedish antiwar demonstra tors as he entered the royal pal ace to present his credentials to King Gustaf VI Adolf.
The Vietnam Moratorium movement will attempt today to stage its first major protests against the conflict in five months with demonstrations outside Internal Revenue Serv ice offices across the country.
TRENTON, April 13 (AP)— A bill similar to a Massachu setts law allowing servicemen to refuse to fight in Vietnam was introduced today in the New Jersey Legislature. The bill is sponsored by Assembly man George C. Richardson, Essex County Democrat. Mr. Richardson, a Negro, is the assistant Assembly minority leader and a candidate for Mayor of Newark.
The terrifying jungles of Vietnam shield from view many atrocities on both sides of the unseen battle lines. But certain disdainful phrases rise above the smoke of “free‐fire zones” to reveal the brutalizing meaning of the war.
WASHINGTON, April 14 (AP) —The Defense Department to day announced the names of the following servicemen from the New York area killed in action in the Vietnam war:
GODAUHA, South Vietnam, April 14 (Reuters) — South Vietnamese Government troops beat off a North Vietnamese attack from across the Cam bodian border today, killing 110 enemy soldiers and captur ing seven prisoners, their com mander reported.
ATLANTA, April 14 (AP)— Capt. Ernest L. Medina today attended the first formal hear ing on murder charges against him in connection with the alleged 1968 massacre at Songmy.
On August 2, 1964, in the face of a deepening mili tary and political crisis in South Vietnam and on the eve of a bitterly contested Presidential campaign in the United States, the Johnson Administration an nounced that the United States destroyer Maddox had been the target of an “unprovoked attack” by PT boats while on “routine patrol in international waters” in the Gulf of Tonkin off North Vietnam. Two days later, the Pentagon reported a second attack.
WASHINGTON, April 15 — The Federal Government took steps today to halt the use of the controversial herbicide 2,4,5‐T as a weed‐killer around, homes and ordered the suspen sion of its use as a defoliant in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, April 15— The Navy called its first eight witnesses today in the sedition court‐martial of Seaman Roger Lee Priest, who has published an antiwar newsletter critical of Government policy and high ranking military figures. 
KHANHBINH, South Viet nam, April 14 — There is no mistaking the border here. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 16 (AP)—The United States command re ported today that 25 Americans were killed and 54 wounded yesterday, one of the year's highest one‐day casualty tolls Vietcong gunners also fired rockets into Saigon for the sec ond time in three nights. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 15 — South Vietnamese troops, operating with a token force of Cambodians, destroyed a North Vietnamese base camp inside Cambodia yesterday in the first major combined oper ation reported in the war, informed sources said today. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 15 — Foreign Minister Yem Sambaur informed chiefs of dip lomatic missions today of the Cambodian Government's uni versal appeal for arms assist ance against Vietnamese Com munist invasion. 
The first major demonstration here against the war in Viet nam in five months drew a crowd estimated at 25,000 peo ple to Bryant Park yesterday afternoon, but their protest was nearly drowned out by slogans shouted by a variety of small radical groups. 
Demonstrations were held across the country yesterday to protest the war in Vietnam and the taxes that help pay for it. 
NEAK LEUNG, Cambodia, April 15 — The bodies of hun dreds of Vietnamese floated down the Mekong River in southeast Cambodia today, many with their hands tied behind them. They appeared to be victims of a mass killing. 
WASHINGTON, April 15 (AP) —The Defense Department to day identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in action in Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, April 15— (AP)—Because of the Apollo 13 flight difficulties, Presi dent Nixon today put off un til the first of the week the report to the nation he had scheduled for tomorrow night on Vietnam and United States troop levels there. 
WASHINGTON, April 15 (UPI)—Louis B. Lundborg, the head of the world's largest private bank said today that the Vietnam war was a “tragic mistake” that had distorted the United States economy. 
Evidence of Government‐inspired mass murder of Vietnamese civilians living in Cambodia should pro voke second thoughts in Washington about the stabil ity as well as the morality of the regime that recently displaced Prince Sihanouk in Pnompenh.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., April 16 — Tear gas still hung in the air near Harvard Yard late to day after a night of rioting led by the November Action Coalition, an offshoot of Stu dents for a Democratic Society.
April 16, 1970
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., April 16—Yakov A. Malik, the Soviet Union's chief delegate to the United Nations, said today that the situation in Southeast Asia “is not a matter for the United Nations,” but one for a new Geneva Conference.
WASHINGTON, April 16 — Gov. James A. Rhodes of Ohio was sitting last week in a model kitchen in Bryan, Ohio, discussing his campaign for the Senate with a group of sup porters.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, April 17 (AP)—South Viet nam has offered to repatriate all Vietnamese nationals living in Cambodia, Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam said today.
COLUMBIA, S. C., April 16 — The operators of one of the first antiwar G.I. coffeehouses went on trial today on charges of operating a public nuisance. State Circuit Judge E. Harry Agnew ruled that the common law violation could carry a sen tence up to 10 years in prison.
SAIGON, South Vietnam April 16 — The United States combat death toll rose again last week to 141, the highest since last September, the Unit ed States command announced today.
WASHINGTON, April 16 The wife of a Navy submarine commander testified at a court martial hearing today that she had distrubuted an antiwar newsletter because she felt the war in Vietnam was a “terrible mistake” for the United States.
WASHINGTON, April 15 (AP)—A special House panel investigating the alleged Song my massacre subpoened today six Army officers and enlisted men, including Capt. Ernest L. Medina, saying the Army had refused to let them testify vol untarily.
WASHINGTON, April 16 (AP) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, April 16— The United States has received a specific request from Cam bodia for arms and military supplies, but not American troops, to fight North Viet namese and Vietcong invaders, State Department officials said today.
The New York Civil Liber ties Union reported yester day that it had not encoun tered a single incident of abuse by the police during the Moratorium Day antiwar demonstrations Wednesday.
GOTEBORG, Sweden, April 17 (UPI)—Michael Weyle, the cultural attaché of the United States Embassy in Bonn, fled through the back door of a building at the University of Goteborg last night after radi cal students opposed to the Vietnam War forced cancella tion of his speech. Universityli officials later made an official apology to Mr. Weyl.
George Meredith once defined the sentimentalist as “he who would enjoy without incurring the immense debtorship for a thing done'—that is to say, he who gets intoxicated with the sensations of danger with out exposing himself to the risks. In this sense, there is certainly a horde of sentimen talists at large in this country.
CHICAGO, April 17 (AP)— Judge Julius J. Hoffman of Federal District Court granted today a Government request to continue until June the riot conspiracy charges against Bobby G. Seale, Black Panther party chairman.
WASHINGTON, April 17— The White House said today that the United States was in terested in exploring with the Soviet Union the possibility of convening an international con ference to resolve the conflicts in Indochina.
WASHINGTON, April 17 (AP)—President Nixon will deliver his television‐and radio report on Vietnam Monday evening from his home in San Clemente, Calif.
WASHINGTON, April 17 — Johnny Cash came from the country to the capital tonight to perform at the White House.
LONDON, April 17—On Feb. ?? 1949, the American repre sentative at the United Nations, Philip C. Jessup, met the Soviet delegate, Yakov A. Malik, in a corridor of the U.N. building. Dr. Jessup used the accidental encounter to ask a carefully prepared question about the Berlin blockade. After consult ing Moscow, Mr. Malik gave a reply that in due course led to the end of the blockade.
WASHINGTON, April 17— The Five Navy officers serving at the court‐martial of Seaman Roger Lee Priest listened to tape recording today hi which the sailor remarked that career military officers were “prosti tuting themselves.
At a time when increasing numbers of nations are inviting Americans to visit their lands without visas— and without scrutiny of their teachings and writings— the State Department is using its visa power to deny entry to the United States on political grounds. A few weeks ago Dr. Ernest E. Mandel, a Marxist economist from Belgium, was prevented from speaking here after a number of university scholars had invited him.
WASHINGTON, April 17 (AP) —The Defense Department an nounced today that Army Spe cialist 4 Ralph M. Jenerson of Newark had been killed in ac tion in Vietnam.
SANTA BARBARA, Calif., April 17—Santa Barbara Coun ty deputy sheriffs, reinforced by riot control squads from police agencies in neighboring coun ties, stood prepared today to quell expected new youth dem onstrations in the community of Isla Vista, bordering the Uni versity of California's Santa Barbara campus.
TAKEO, Cambodia, April 17 —About 100 Vietnamese civil ians, including perhaps 30 children, were shot to death by Cambodian soldiers last night in a grade school where they were under detention, sur vivors said today at the scene of the slayings.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., April 17—Cambodia's new chief delegate here said today that he did not want to believe Cam bodian soldiers had slain hun dreds of innocent Vietnamese civilians.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 17 (Reuters) — A mili tary spokesman said today that the Vietcong had more than doubled their area of control in Cambodia in the last two weeks.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 17— The mass killings of Vietnamese in Cambodia in recent days have stirred deep anger among the people here and have confronted the Gov ernment with a difficult political problem.
The demonstrators who during the April 15 antiwar rallies drowned out the concerned outcry for peace with their demands for “Revolution Now” showed once again their incompatibility with the broadly based movement against the war in Vietnam. Their goal is evidently to undermine any drive for a better society. The rational, democratic search for reform threatens the romantic anarchism of those whose dream of a Utopia arising out of revolutionary holacaust.
WASHINGTON, April 18— Some high Administration of ficials have been urging Presi dent Nixon to adopt a formula for a troop reduction in Viet nam that would serve as a compromise between the de sire of civilian officials to move faster, and the warnings of military advisers that to do so could court serious dangers.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 18 (UPI)—Cambodian itary officials reported today that Vietcong forces had encir cled the provincial capital of Takeo and moved to within 22 miles of Pnompenh.
HOUSTON, April 18—The is sue of women's liberation was subordinated at the national convention of the Young Wom en's Christian Association this week when delegates voted to make the elimination of racism their prime goal.
Recent events have revealed the existence of another minor ity group, now on the receiving end of prejudice and discrimina tion. Southern whites, unlike your editorial writer of April 11, see and feel this clearly, so they don't view President Nixon's remarks on the Cars well rejection as a “crudely divisive statement.”
China trade, a source of adventure and profit for ear lier generations of American merchants, is again stirring interest among the nation's business leaders.
WASHINGTON, April 18— The Khmers Rouges, the Cam bodian equivalent of the South Vietnamese Vietcong guerrillas, may become an important po litical element in Cambodia, in the opinion of United States Government experts on Indo china.
FIRE BASE WOOD, South Vietnam, April 11—The United States Army seems to love dust. It is almost as if dust was is sued to every soldier with his rifle as an essential commodity of warfare in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, April 18 — Authoritative United States and diplomatic sources indicated today that Washington and Saigon had recently reached an understanding that would per mit South Vietnamese ground and air forces to mount limited attacks on suspected North Vietnamese and Vietcong sanc tuaries in Cambodia.
PHOMPENH, Cambodia—What with bullet‐riddled bodies of hun dreds of Vietnamese, many bound to each other and with their hands tied, floating down the Mekong River and an atmos phere of racial fervor demanded by the Government and gladly given by the people, the leaders of Cambodia find themselves in a paradoxical situation:
HONG KONG, April 18— The recent massacres of Viet namese civilians by Cam bodians is a new dark chapter in a history of bitterness and feuding between the two peo ples whose ancient, tangled roots go deep.
WASHINGTON, April 18— You can put it down as a fair ly reliable rule that periods of war or fierce domestic contro versy tend to threaten or re strict the constitutional lib erties of the American people. And with the war in Vietnam and a crime wave at home, we are clearly going through an other such time.
ARDSLEY, N.Y., April 18—A Federal suit brought by four high school students against the Ardsley School Board and District Superintendent has generated bitterness in this Westchester County community of over 4,700 people.
TO THE EDITOR: J. Anthony Lukas concludes his excellent article on the recent trial of the Chicago Eight (“The Second Confron tation in Chicago,” Mardi 29) with the observation that in stitutions—in this case the courts — are perhaps best tested under extraordinary pressure. Against this stand ard, Mr. Lukas finds the court system locking.
DANANG, Sout, Vietnam. April 18 (AP)—The commander of the United States First Ma rine Division, Maj. Gen. Edwin R. Wheneler, suffered a broken leg today in a helicopter crash about 15 miles southwest of here, military spokesmen re ?? ??.
Secretary of State William P. Rogers said yesterday that the United States was attempt ing to find out whether the Soviet Union was ready to make any specific proposals concerning a new Geneva con ference on Indochina.
HONG KONG, April 18 (Reu ters) — Three Americans left Hanoi yesterday after having met Premier Pham Van Dong and other North Vietnamese officials, the Vietnam press agency said in a broadcast monitored here today. They were Noam Chomsky, professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Prof Douglas Dowd of Cornell, an economist, and Richard Fernandez, chair man of the Committtee for Clergymen and Laymen Con cerned About Vietnam.
Ever since mass demonstra tions against the war in Viet nam were first started, there, has been a deepening cleavage over strategy and ideology within the peace movement between its lib eral center and its increasingly radical left.
KHAU KHOR, Cambodia, April 19 — A Vietnamese Coin munist unit seized without a fight the town of Saang, 20 miles south of Pnompenh, to day, a field commander nearby reported. 
WASHINGTON, April 19 — The United States, it was dis closed today, secretly stationed air observers in northern Laos in 1966 to help guide the bomb ing of Pathet Lao and North Vietnamese forces by Royal Laotian and American planes. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 19—The tumultuous sit uation in Cambodia—which just a month ago seemed to hold such promise for United States interests in Indochina— is fast beginning to sour, in the opinion of senior United States officials here. 
WASHINGTON, April 19— After nearly a year of trying to mobilize Americans against the war in Vietnam, the Viet nam Moratorium Committee announced today that it was disbanding. 
To the Editor:Not surprisingly, in rejecting the nomination of Judge G. Harrold Carswell the Senate split according to generally predictable party and sectional groupings. Another split, less apparent, but perhaps more significant, also occurred. 
CHAUDOC, South Vietnam, April 11—Hundreds of South Vietnamese troops supported by armored vehicles and artil lery fire returned here last night from an extensive two‐ day operation in Cambodia, ac cording to witnesses and knowledgable military sources.
WASHINGTON, April 19 AP) —Pollution control will soon require expenditures of $25‐bil lion to $30‐billion a year, Sen ator Gaylord A. Nelson, Demo crat of Wisconsin, said today. And pollution “is much more important than space, weapons systems, or the money we're wasting in Vietnam,” the Sen ator said on the CBS‐TV pro gram “Face the Nation.”
PARIS, April 20—The Viet cong today turned down the French proposal for a new, in ternational conference on Indo china.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, April 21 (AP) — Two thousand South Vietnamese troops, tanks and armored personnel carriers thrust into Cambodia yesterday in the third major offensive across the border in the last week and killed 144 North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops, informed sources said today.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., April 20 — President Nixon pledged tonight to withdraw 150,000 more troops from Vietnam over the next year and once again appealed to the North Vietnam ese to undertake serious nego tiations.
ST. LOUIS, April 20 — The nation's 100 Methodist bishops today called the war in Vietnam a “fiasca impossible to justify” and urged the immediate accel eration of troop withdrawals along with stepped‐up peace talks in Paris.
WASHINGTON, April 20 (UPI)—The Defense Departmeni today listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
Ford Move vs. Douglas
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 20 — A special military court trying 21 university stu dents on charges of treason and violating security unexpectedly granted a defense appeal to day and adjourned the proceedings pending a ruling by the South Vietnamese Supreme Court on the constitutionality of the trial. The military tri bunal also released ten of the defendants pending the Supreme Court decision.
The Administration's rapid and positive response to a hint that the Soviet Union favors a new Geneva conference on Indochina—as the French have pro posed—is a hopeful sign that the need to revitalize peace negotiations is fully recognized in Washington.
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's televised address to the nation last night on Vietnam, as recorded by The New York Times:
WASHINGTON, April 20— Hanoi has called on Commu nist forces to kill American sol diers in South Vietnam at a rate “far beyond the 100‐a week level, which the United States ruling clique has con sidered bearable.”
SAANG, Cambodia, April 20 —The war between Cambodia and Vietnamese Communist forces reached within 15 miles of Pnompenh today with a bat tle for this district capital of a few thousand people. The marketplace marked the front line.
SYDNEY, Australia, April 20 —Prime Minister John Gorton is expected to announce this week that Australia will withdraw one of her three infantry battalions now in Vietnam.
TELEVISION'S commercial and noncommercial net works offered instant com mentaries after President Nixon's speech last night. The main reaction appeared to be uncertainty over exact ly what strategy the Presi dent was pursuing in his campaign of Vietnamization.
President Nixon, in a televised report on the Vietnam conflict, announced plans for the withdrawal of 150,000 more American troops over the next year. Mr. Nixon said that the training and equipping of the South Vietnamese Army had “substantially ex ceeded” expectations. [Page 1, Cols. 6–8.]
OF ALL the boutiques that Bloomingdale's, has had— and it has had plenty—probably the most successful has been micmac of St. Tropez, which took up residence on the third floor a couple of years ago. One reason is that the designer for it, Tan Giudicelli (half Italian, half Vietnamese), has, always had a knack for turning out clothes that are up to the minute, or even ahead of it—but that are not too far out. With their smart look just this side of sportiness, they have appealed both to dashing young wo men and to not‐so‐young and not‐so‐dashing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 21 (UPI)—A delegation of stu dents today called on the South Vietnamese Premier, Tran Thien Khiem, who promised an inves tigation to determine whether 21 other students were tortured while awaiting trial on charges of pro‐Communist activity.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 21 (Reuters) — President Nguyen Van Thieu said tonight that South Vietnam needed more aid from its allies to assume full responsibility for its defense.
There is a bitter‐sweet message in President Nixon's announcement that United States forces in Vietnam will be reduced by 150,000 during the coming year, the same withdrawal rate as in recent months. By next spring almost half the American troops will be out. But about half will still be there, 284,000 of them, more than two years after Mr. Nixon's assump tion of office with a pledge and an undisclosed “plan” to end the war.
WASHINGTON, April 21 — The defense rested its case to day in the court‐martial of Seaman Roger Lee Priest after some of the testimony of sev eral witnesses—including law professors, a folk singer and the defendant's father—had been ruled irrelevant.
NEW HAVEN, April 21—A Superior Court judge freed David Hilliard and Emory Doug las from jail today after the two national Black Panther party leaders stood before the bench and apologized for an in cident a week ago that led to their being sentenced to six months for contempt of court.
WASHINGTON, April 21 — Most senior Pentagon leaders, military and civilian, learned of plans to withdraw 150,000 more United States troops from Vietnam over the next 12 months only when President Nixon announced the decision on television last night, ac cording to Defense Department sources.
WASHINGTON, April 21 — The first reactions here to Pres ident Nixon's latest report on Vietnam focused on his obvious effort to balance the political pressure for more troop with drawals against the military's request for a show of strength on the battlefield in the next few months. The President found his compro mise in the kind of annual timetable that he had re fused to proclaim last autumn. He committed himself to the mini mum withdrawal rate of 12,000 men a month over the coming year. But he left his generals free to argue for slowdowns and speed‐ups as the course of battle changes, provided only that they scale down to $284, 000 men by next spring.
ELIZABETH, N. J., April 21 —Senator Harrison A. Williams Jr., a Democrat, appealed for a return to office today on the ground that the nation needs “a Democratic Congress that will not rubber‐stamp token withdrawals while the war spills over into Laos and Cambodia.”
WASHINGTON, April 20 (UPI)—More than 3,800 Navy men have been discharged in the last year for illegally using or pushing drugs, but the prob lem is not centered in Vietnam as many persons believe.
WASHINGTON, April 21 — Deputy Premier Chiang Ching kuo of Nationalist China was reported today to have warned Secretary of State Wil liam P. Rogers that the Nixon Administration's gestures to improve relations with Commu nist China were not in the in terests of peace in Asia.
WASHINGTON, April 21 (UPI) —Andre L. Knoppert, born in the Netherlands, became an American citizen today, but he will never vote or exercise his other rights of citizenship. Lance Corporal Knoppert, a marine, died in 1969 at the age of 21 when he stepped on an enemy land mine near the vil lage of Danang in Vietnam. Citizenship came posthumously under legislation introduced by Senator Frank E. Moss of Utah.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 21—President Nixon's decision to phase the next stage of Unit ed States troop withdrawals over a 12‐month period won a warm reception among senior American officers here today.
An agent of the Internal Revenue Service has been spend ing hours in the screening room of National Educational Television at 10 Columbus Circle to determine whether any of the group's noncommer cial TV programs in 1969 ad vocated legislation that might involve tax‐exempt problems.
UNIVERSITY PARK, Pa., April 21 (UPI) — About 50 student ended a brief sit‐in at the main administration build ing of Pennsylvania State University today after state troopers were called to the campus for the second time in a week.
MOSCOW, April 21 — Le Duan, First Secretary of the North Vietnamese Communist party, said here today that the people of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia would unify their ef forts against “American im perialists.”
WASHINGTON, April 20 — Representative Edward P. Bo land of Massachusetts, a senior Democrat on the House Appro priations Committee, introduced a resolution today calling on the Administration to “acceler ate” troop withdrawals so that no American combat forces would remain in Vietnam a year from now. The Boland resolu tion, introduced before President Nixon's speech on Vietnam, would also express the sense of Congress that United States military activities in countries bordering Vietnam should be restricted to those “necessary to shield American troops in Vietnam against enemy infil tration.”
WASHINGTON, April 20 (AP) —In a White House ceremony today, Vice President Agnew presented the Medal of Honor to wives and parents of 13 Ma rines and two sailors who were killed while winning the na tion's highest decoration in Vietnam.
In announcing the with drawal of another 150,000 American troops from Vietnam within the next twelve months, President Nixon said “this far reaching decision was made after consultation with our commanders in the field and it has the approval of the Government of South Vietnam.”
WASHINGTON, April 21 (AP] —The Pentagon today identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
WELLINGTON, New Zea and, April 21 (AP) —New Zea and will not emulate the Unit ed States and reduce its mili tary force in Vietnam now, Prime Minister Keith J. Holy pake said today.
To the Editor: As a recent candidate for the Senatorial nomination of my party, I can persuasively testify that the high cost of political campaigns has become a prob lem of immense proportion.
April 22, 1970
WASHINGTON, April 22 (AP) —H. Ross Perot, the Texas mil lionaire who has been active in efforts to aid prisoners of war in North Vietnam, was ap pointed by President Nixon to day as a member of the board of visitors of the United States Naval Academy.
CANBERRA, Australia, April 22 (AP) — The Government has decided to withdraw one of the three Australian battal ions serving in South Vietnam, along with some support troops, Prime Minister John Gorton announced in Parlia ment today.
WEST LONG BRANCH, N. J., April 22 (AP) — Booing and brawling antiwar activists to night forced Gen. Maxwell Tay lor, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to termi nate a speech on the Vietnam conflict after only a few words at Monmouth College here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 22 (AP) — The United States Command announced to day the loss of four American planes over southeastern Laos and three helicopters in South Vietnam. It was one of the highest aircraft tolls reported at one time in the war.
The public temper on the major issues of the time—from the war in Vietnam to racial integration—has cooled in the last year, a geographical sam pling of newspaper editors and publishers meeting here indi cated yesterday.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., April 22 — Cambodia made “an urgent appeal to all coun tries which love peace and jus tice” today to help the new Government to fight invading Vietcong and North Vietnam ese forces.
WASHINGTON, April 22 — The Nixon Administration has agreed to supply several thou sand rifles to the beleaguered Government of Cambodia, Ad ministration officials disclosed today. The weapons would be automatic rifles of Soviet de sign captured from Communist forces in South Vietnam.
President fixon's announced plan to withdraw 150,000 more troops from Vietnam inevitably raises hopes that the United States is now decisively shifting its national priorities and will soon have the resources needed to tackle domestic social problems that have long been starved for funds by the war. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., April 23 (AP)—A military judge to day set a new trial date of Aug. 24 for First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., who is charged with murdering 102 Vietnamese civil ians at Songmy in 1968. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 23—Informed Cambodian sources reported today that their country had received shipment of weapons for its underequipped army, which has been striving to check ad vances by Vietnamese Commu nist troops. 
PARIS, April 23—Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's chief negotia tor at the peace talks here, is expected to return to Hanoi in a few days, and the Vietcong delegation hinted today that its leader, Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, might also leave Paris. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 23 (UPI) — Cambodia agreed today to admit a South Vietnamese Red Cross delega tion this weekend to start the repatriation of 600,000 Viet namese. 
Indochina Formula
WASHINGTON, April 23 (AP) —The Defense Department an nounced today that Army Spec ialist 4 Richard H. Ward of Philadelphia, N.Y., had been killed in action in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, April 22 (AP) —H. Ross Perot, the Texas mil lionaire who has been active in efforts to aid prisoners of war in North Vietnam, was ap pointed by President Nixon Wednesday as a member of the board of visitors of the United States Naval Academy. 
WASHINGTON, April 23 — In his latest report on the war in Vietnam, President Nixon said: “A fair political solution should reflect the existing re lationship of political forces within South Vietnam. We rec ognize the complexity of shap ing machinery that would fairly apportion political power in South Vietnam. We're flexible. We have offered nothing on a take it or leave it basis.” 
WASHINGTON, April 23 (AP) —A Navy court found Seaman Roger Lee Priest not guilty of the most serious accusations against him tonight but found him guilty on two counts of promoting disloyalty and dis affection among servicemen. 
TOKYO, April 23 (AP)— North Vietnam charged today that the United States carried out “fresh air raids on a num ber of populated areas in North Vietnam” on Sunday. 
PARIS —The great American troop withdrawal from foreign parts appears irreversible, un less wholly unexpected crises come, and affects both East and West. Over a hundred thousand soldiers have already left Viet nam and President Nixon prom ises to take away another 150, 000 within a year. 
WASHINGTON, April 23— President Nixon is struggling with a decision on further mil itary aid to Cambodia in terms that at least some of his ad visers portray as fateful. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 23 (AP)—Enemy gunners in Laos and South Vietnam shot down 12 American air craft t in a two‐day period this week, the United States com mand said today. 
CAIRO, April 23 (Reuters) —The United Arab Republic has agreed to raise the diplo matic representation here of the Vietcong‐sponsored pro visional revolutionary govern ment in South Vietnam to am bassadorial level, it was an nounced today. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 24—High military sources re ported today that there was a greatly increasing number of local attacks by the enemy throughout the frontier regions occupied by the Vietnamese Communists. They expressed concern that the enemy might be preparing an offensive de signed to divide Cambodia in two. Enemy raids were reported in the last 24 hours in all sectors east of an axis running from the southern town of Kompot through Takeo, Prey and Chup to the northernmost prov ince of Ratanakiri, which is mountainous, and sparsely pop ulated and has long been a cen ter of heavy Vietnamese Com munist infiltration.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 24 (AP)—New fighting was reported today near the beleaguered allied camp at Dakseang near the Laotian border. 
WASHINGTON, April 24—At torneys for Seaman Roger Lee Priest protested today that the sailor should not have been taken into custody despite his conviction by a military court late last night. 
HATIEN, South Vietnam, April 19—Le Tan Son, a Viet namese refugee from Cambodia, decided it was time to flee when, he said, he saw two Vietnamese monks and a nun stabbed to death on a Pnom penh street. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 24—The Cambodian military acknowledged today that the shipment of arms re ceived yesterday consisted of Soviet‐designed and Chinese manufactured AK‐47 auto matic rifles and ammunition that had been captured from Communist forces in South Vietnam.
PARIS, April 24 — France will turn down a request from the Cambodian Government for arms to fight North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces, according to informed diplomatic sources here. 
WASHINGTON, April 24— The United States and the So viet Union publicly disagreed today over the character of the current fighting in Cambodia, although the two Governments were reported to be maintains ing private contacts on the pos sibility of a broad Indochina peace conference. 
HONG KONG, April 25 (Reu ters)—Communist China op posed today any reconvening of the Geneva conference and ac cused the Soviet Union of be traying the peoples of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. 
SPRINGFIELD, Ill., April 25 —The Illinois Senate this week received a report calling the Weatherman faction of Stu dents for a Democratic Society “an immediate and long‐range threat” to the nation's internal security. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, April 26 (AP)—A United States Air Force major who was convicted of smuggling opium from Thai land and illegal possession of American dollars was sen tenced today to 16 years at hard labor. 
An increasing number of clergymen are seeking national or statewide elective office this year in what appears primarily to be their growing impatience with the continued fighting in Vietnam and with the pace of antipoverty efforts. 
?? political and international atmosphere is still quite tense in many areas—on economic and social issues at home and in the Cambodian, Vietnam and Middle East situations abroad.
Secretary of State William P. Rogers accused the Soviet Union yesterday of flouting its international obligations in fail ing to help reconvene the Geneva Conference as a step toward restoring peace in Indo china. 
FACULTY... ADVISERS?
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 25 (UPI) — Enemy troops fired rockets into a Government artil lery base near the besieged Spe cial Forces outpost at Dakseang in one of 41 shelling attacks yesterday and today. 
Banker's View on War
WASHINGTON, April 25— American specialists on Vietna mese affairs view a recent speech by a high Vietcong of ficial as strongly suggestive of Communist concern over the rural pacification and Vietnam ization effort. 
WASHINGTON—There was so much news here about the war in Indochina last week it was hard to tell what was going on. 
WASHINGTON, April 25 — The Nixon Administration is seriously considering diverting money from the Model Cities program to provide funds that the President promised for school desegregation and for improving the quality of edu cation in black schools. 
Far from being inadequate, the pro grams of the Department of Correc tion are exemplary. They reflect an enlightened recognition of all that is desirable to effect the rehabilitation of the deviant. There is no emphasis on punishment. There is an intelli gent effort to effect rehabilitation consistent with necessary custody.— JOHN V. LINDSAY, at the Adolescent Remand Shelter, Rikers Island, Feb. 28, 1969.
PNOMPENH, April 25—The Cambodian Government, faced with broad inroads by Vietna mese Communist forces and in creasingly worried about the security of Pnompenh, is tight ening measures against the capital's Vietnamese residents.
The fundamental decision that confronts President Nixon in Cambodia is not whether to send further arms aid at this time but whether to pursue a mili tary mirage. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 26 — The Cambodian Govern ment today reported having captured Angtassom, a town 40 miles south of here, but report ers trying to reach it said that Vietcong forces still occupied the roads. 
CHRUI CHANGWAR, Cam bodia, April 26 — Fourteen women attended mass this morning in this village of Vietnamese Roman Catholics across the Tonle Sap River from Phnompenh. Four bare foot boys sat among them, and another assisted the priest, a Frenchman. A French Benedictine monk was the only other person in view in the small Carmelite chapel. 
WASHINGTON, April 26— President Nixon and his top political and military advisers continued today to weigh United States policy in the rapidly deteriorating Cambo dian situation as Administra tion officials acknowledged that this might be a critical week in the crisis. 
LONDON—How familiar it all seems as the generals and the jingoes begin their pressure for American intervention in Cambodia. The situation, we read, gives us a great chance to win the Vietnam war—if only we expand it. We must send arms and encourage the South Vietnamese Army to cross the border. The oppor tunity to clean out the Commu nist sanctuary is almost too rood to be true. Etcetera. 
Less than a generation ago, the tapped wire, the bugged room, the secret informer evoked contempt and ridicule in the minds of most Americans. These were the marks of police states in a jaded Old World. It could not happen here. 
General Maxwell D. Taylor knows as much about America's involvement in Vietnam as anyone in the world. He was President Kennedy's Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, President Johnson's Ambassador to South Vietnam, still serves as President Nixon's Chairman of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board. 
HONG KONG, April 26— North Vietnam and Communist China have made it clear that they oppose a conference of Asian nations on Cambodia as proposed by Adam Malik, In donesia's Foreign Minister.
Non‐Vietnam defense spend ing is likely to increase sharply over the next five years, off setting a significant part of the decline in Vietnam expendi tures, according to an analysis of the Federal Budget released yesterday by the National In dustrial Conference Board. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday. April 27 (Reuters)— United States military spokes men said today that Vietcong broke through the perimeter of an American artillery base 46 miles northwest of Saigon last night and killed four Americans and wounded 12 in a half‐hour battle.
HONG KONG, Monday, April 27 (Reuters) — The deposed Chief of State of Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, met leaders of North Vietnam, the Vietcong and the Pathet Lao Friday and Saturday, the North Vietnam press agency said today.
HONG KONG, April 27— Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the deposed Chief of State of Cam bodia, and Communist and other leftist leaders of North Vietnam, Laos and South Viet nam have pledged mutual sup port in their fight against the United States and other forces that oppose them in Indochina.
MOSCOW, April 27—The So viet Union expressed opposi tion today to the convening of any international conference to eal with the crisis in Cambodia.
Cambodian Massacres
WASHINGTON, April 27— Exhausted by over 5,000 miles of travel in less than 24 hours, the members of the press “pool” accompanying President Nixon on the return leg of his recent whirlwind trip to Honolulu fell asleep somewhere across the Pacific. Without warning, a dark, familiar shape ap peared and drew back the curtain of the separating the White Home press section of the airplane from the larger quarters reserved for the Presidential party. The man from The Associated Press, who had one eye open, quickly nudged his colleagues from the National Broadcast ing Company, The New York Times and United Press In ternational. Too late. By the time they had roused them selves, President Nixon had smiled, closed the curtain and disappeared.
AMONG contemporary-urban-scene-movies (sub-genre, invasion-of-privacy) Brian De Palma's "Hi, Mom!" stands out for its wit, its ironic good humor, its multilevel sophistications, its technical ingenuity, its nervousness, and its very special ability to bring the sensibility of the suburbs to the sins of the inner city. With no recognizable landmark further north than Cooper Square, it nevertheless feels like Bronxville or the quieter stretches of the upper East Side.Not that it aspires to quietness or that it even for a second eschews relevancy. One major portion (for me, the best portion) depicts an all-black play production, "Be Black, Baby," in which the cast, in white face, mingles with, steals from, and finally beats and rapes the white liberal audience. And the hero, a young Vietnam veteran, moves from filthy picture-taking to middle-class apartment house bombing, partly in an effort to achieve total involvement—which, in the terms of this film, seems necessarily to include a final solution.But the eager hero (Robert De Niro) and the over-eager heroine (Jennifer Salt, the major interest of the flashbacks in "Midnight Cowboy," revealed as a fine comedienne here) are so clean-cut; the second leads, white and black, so epitomize attractive youth; and the supporting cast, as in many Brian De Palma movies, could so handsomely model a panoramic painting of the Rape of the Seven Sister Colleges; that an air of tasteful respectability pervades even the outrageous violence. As if they were making bombs on West 11th Street."Hi, Mom!" turns approximately every other current social misery to a comedy that is sometimes quite elabborately successful and sometimes only well intentioned. As in De Palma's previous "Greetings," the humor, at its best, is understated but highly structured—so that you have to work a bit for your laughs. But "Hi, Mom!" is much sharper, crueler, funnier. Although it scatters some shots (often in a kind of fast-motion photography that seems an addiction of De Palma's) it pulls enough together to suggest some major insights, as it investigates the militarization and despoliation of Washington Square South.But it is the minor insights that most happily remain: the white black-power activist (Gerrit Graham) who for a second demurs before painting his body entirely black; the pornographic-movie impresario (Allen Garfield) who wants to make "the first children's exploitation film—nothing dirty, nothing smutty;" or the mere idea of the TV show that chronicles the opening night of "Be Black, Baby!" A production of National Intellectual Television, it is called "N.I.T. Journal," which, (to my mind, comes under the category of what oft was thought, but ne'er so well expressed.
WASHINGTON, April 27— The Nixon Administration en countered nearly unanimous bipartisan opposition in the Senate Foreign Relations Com mittee today to the extension of military aid to Cambodia.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, April 27—South Vietnam officially called on the Cambodians to day to preserve the lives and property of the Vietnamese mi nority and was told that Cam bodia would take steps “to stop all acts that are contrary to the principles of justice and human ity.”
WASHINGTON, April 27 (AP)—A Navy court rep primanded and ordered a bad conduct discharge today for Seaman Apprentice Roger Lee Priest, who has been convicted of “promoting disloyalty and disaffection” through his anti war newsletter, Om.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 27 (AP) — The United States command reported to day the loss of an AC‐130 gun ship over southern Laos. Six crewmen were killed, four are missing and one was rescued, spokesmen here said.
COLUMBIA, S. C., April 27 TThree operators of the U.F.O Coffee Housse, one of the firs antiwar coffee houses that ca tered to G.I.'s, were found guil ty here today of operating and maintaining a public nuisance.
Senator Charles E. Goodell told a group of older persons yesterday at a tea opening Sen ior Citizens Month that all the expenditures authorized by Congress under the Older Americans Act from its incep tion in 1965 would finance the war in Vietnam for less than two days.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 28 (AP) — The United States command announced to day the loss of five aircraft in which 15 Americans died and six were injured, and an acidental bombing by Ameri can planes that killed 10 South Vietnamese militiamen and wounded 20 others.
COLUMBIA, S. C., April 28— Three operators of an antiwar coffeehouse that catered to sol diers were each sentenced to six years in prison today after their conviction yesterday on charges of operating a public nuisance.
PARIS, April 27—Opponents of the French Government have been criticizing France's con tinuing military intervention in Chad, the central African state that they sometimes call „France's Vietnam.”ter of protecting the existence of Chad? And if so, who would threaten it?” He went on: “Is it a matter of protecting strategic interests and the uranium of Niger and of the Central Afri can Republic?”
PARIS—“Does television by its very presence at an event help to create an explosive at mosphere of excitement and disorder?” This question, posed in the current London Encoun ter by the highly regarded Brit ish television commentator, Robin Day, undoubtedly lies at the source of many contempo rary political headaches.
CHRUI CHANGWAR, Cam bodia, April 28—The mayor of Pnompenh crossed the Tonle Sap River today to this village to show an official of the South Vietnamese Foreign Ministry how Cambodia treats members of her Vietnamese minority.
HONG KONG, April 28— Communist China today hailed the weekend meeting between Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the deposed Cambodian Head of State, and top Communist of ficials from North and South Vietnam and Laos, and express ed support for a joint declara tion adopted by the delegates.
BOSTON, April 28 (AP)—The mother of a soldier killed in Vietnam filed suit today in Federal Court against the United States Government for $10,000. The suit, filed for Mrs. Mary C. Dagget of New Bedford, alleges that the Gov ernment failed to pay the premiums on a policy taken out by Pfc. Joseph R. Paulette, 22 years old, who was killed in action April 9, 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 28—In South Vietnam, where the Government for bids antiwar demonstrations, limits freedom of speech and censors books before publi cation, artists have unusual freedom in protesting against the war and the influence of foreigners in their country.
WASHINGTON, April 28 (AP) —The State Department said today that anti‐American dem onstrations in Stockholm yes terday were “insulting and uncalled for” and a spokesman indicated that some diplomatic action might be taken.
WASHINGTON, April 28 (AP) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the fol lowing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, April 28 (AP) —Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that draft calls this year may be reduced to as low as 150,000 men— about 100,000 under original plans—because of troop with drawals from Vietnam. This is the lowest estimate yet made.
WASHINGTON, April 28 — An Army lawyer warned today that public disclosure of evi dence in a two‐year‐old murder case connecting the United States Special Forces, the Green Berets, to a Cambodian sect once dedicated to the overthrow of Prince Norodom Sihanouk would threaten American security.
HONG KONG, April 28 (reu ters) — North Vietnam made public today the names of 129 Vietnamese and Chinese who were allegedly massacred in Prasault, in a Svayrieng Prov ince, April 9 by Cambodian troops on Government orders.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 29 (AP)—The United States command refused to day to permit American cor respondents to accompany American support units in the new Cambodian operation. Officers that that it was an operation directed by the South Vietnamese but that the South Vietnamese were making no press arrange ments either.
WASHINGTON, April 29—As so often before in the Indochina war, an American President has chosen to expand the conflict in the hope of ending it more quickly.
MOSCOW, April 29 (Reuters) —North Vietnam's Communist party leader, Le Duan, flew to Peking today after a 10‐day visit to Moscow, Japanese dip lomatic sources reported.
PHILADELPHIA, April 29 — Mayor Lindsay told 2,000 cheer ing university students tonight that he had “unending admira tion” for those who refused to serve in Vietnam and were will ing to to take the consequences.
WASHINGTON, April 29 — It was late Monday when Presi dent Nixon decided to approve and assist the South Vietnam ese sweep into Cambodia, with the objectives of saving the, Government of Premier Lon Nol and destroying Communist hideouts in Cambodian terni tory, according to high Admin istration quarters.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, April 29—The South Vietna mese military command took the unusual step of suspending military operations around the besieged allied camp at Dak seang today. The action came after a clandestine Vietcong radio station had said that wounded South Vietnamese prisoners would be released the fighting stopped tempo rarily.
WASHINGTON, April 29 (Reu ters)—Charles L. Schultze, a former Director of the Bureau of the Budget estimated today that the war in Vietnam would cost the United States $12 billion to $13‐billion in the 1971 fiscal year, which begins July 1.
WASHINGTON, April 29— The United States announced today that it was providing combat advisers, tactical air support, medical evacuation teams and some supplies to South Vietnamese troops at tacking Communist bases in Cambodia.
THE COUNTRY—About size of state of Missouri, 69,600 square miles, bordered by two traditionally hostile states, South Vietnam on the southeast and Thailand on the northwest, and by Laos on the northeast, and the Gulf of Siam on the southwest. Population estimated 6.5 million composed of four principal ethnic groups. The Khmer, or Cambodian, is by far the largest; others are Vietnamese, Chinese and the Chams, Moslems of Indo nesian stock. Most of the population is rural and farming is maior occupation; mineral resources are undeveloped.
MOSCOW, April 29 (AP) — The Soviet press agency Tass reported today the United States announcement of com bat support for South Vietnam ese troops attacking inside Cambodia. In a dispatch from New York, it said “South Viet namese puppet troops with the support of American detach ments intruded into Cambodian territory in violation if its nuetrality.”
ALEXANDRIA, Va., April 29 (UPI)—The wife of Senator Philip A. Hart, Democrat of Michigan, and seven other lead ers of a Nov. 13 Pentagon “peace mass” have been fined $25 each by a United States magistrate here. All eight were found guilty April 7 of violat ing Federal regulations gov erning the use of the Penta gon. They could have received a maximum of 30 days in jail and $50 fine.
STOCKHOLM, April 29 (AP) — The Swedish Government said today that demonstrators against the new United States, Jerome H. Holland, were scoun drels who damage Sweden's reputation. But the Govern ment reiterated its opposition to American policy in Vietnam.
Wan a view to neutraliz ing the North Vietnamese Communists’ scheme of us ing the Cambodian territory as operation bases to infil trate, shell and attack in the territory of the RVN [Re public of Vietnam] the ARV? [Army of the Republic of Vietnam] have launched an operation on April 29, 1970, to destroy the enemy's bases along the border in the Par rot's Beak, southwest of Tay ninh.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, April 30—South Vietnamese forces supported by United States warplanes and artillery and accompanied by United States advisers swept across the border into Cambodia yesterday in a big operation against North Viet namese and Vietcong sanctu aries inside Cambodia.
President Nixon, who was elected on a pledge to bring peace in Vietnam,. has instead escalated the war into Cambodia in a rash move that has the gravest implications for the United States.
MOSCOW, April 29 (Reuters) —Premier Aleksein Kosygin today endorsed the conference last weekend in which the North Vietnamese, the Viet cong, the Pathet Lao and the deposed Cambodian Chief of State, Prince Norodom Sihan ouk closed ranks.
Mayor John V. Lindsay ex pressed concern yesterday that the Nixon Administration would expand the Vietnam war into Cambodia
JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 29 (Reuters)—Indonesia has invited North Vietnam and 19 other Asian and Pacific coun tries to a conference on Cam bodia to be held next month.
PARIS, April 29 (Reuters)— A Vietcong spokesman tonight dem.unced the military opera tions on Cambodian territory by South Vietnamese troops and American advisers.
KOMPONG CHAM, Cambo dia, April 29—Authoritative official sources here reported today that the important rub ber plantation town of Memot, least of this provincial and mili tary region capital, fell to the North Vietnamese and Vietcong invaders yesterday after three days of encirclement.
Saigon, South Vietnam, April 29 — In a surprising victory for more than 32,000 striking students in the city, the South Vietnamese Supreme Court ruled tonight that t 1962 Government decree that established a special military tribunal was unconstitutional.
VIENTIANE, Laos, April 29 (Agence France‐Presse)—North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troops, in a sudden attack have captured most of Attopeu, a town 30 miles from the Cam bodian border in the southern tip of Laos, a military spokes man said today.
WASHINGTON, April 29— “All right, all right, gentlemen! Enough of this futile weighing of alternatives. I need hard an swers. If we go in with nothing more than military equipment, what explanation can I give the American ueoule?”
WASHINGTON, April 29— The Administration's decision to support a South Vietnamese military operation in Cambodia set off moves by leading Sen ators in both parties today to cut off funds for American military operation in Cambodia
It is hard to believe that popular prophets at the close of 1959 were hailing this now faded decade the “Golden, Sixties.” The label no doubt was another of those triumphs of hope over experience without which the human race might find it hard to keep going. But it had a certain plausibility, too. 
WASHINGTON, Dec.31—The old year, going its unmourned way amid so many clamors and defeats, closed on at least one note of welcome generosity. After a year in intellectual and political exile, former Secretary of State Dean Rusk is, as he puts it, “going home” to Georgia as a member of that state's university faculty.
CHICAGO, Dec. 31—Despite vigorous protests by defense at torneys, Abbie Hoffman was questioned closely today about his alleged plan to “kidnap” a high‐ranking Chicago police of ficial. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 31—After two days of boister ous debate, a narrow majority of the House of Representatives decided today that three of its members had engaged in pro Communist activities. 
GENEVA, Dec. 31—Vice President Agnew's attacks on newspapers and television were 1969's “most serious threat to the freedom of information in the Western World,” the Inter national Press Institute said today. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 (AP) —The Pentagon today identi fied the following servicemen from the New York area as having been lied in Vietnam: 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 — Each soldier, as he arrives in Vietnam for a tour of duty, is handed a small white card that he is instructed to study and carry with him at all times.
BONGSON, South Vietnam, Dec. 29—“I emphasize to my troops that we no longer are preoccupied with chasing and killing the Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army in unpopulat ed jungle and mountain areas. More important, body count is no longer the criteria for suc cess.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 31 (AP)—Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the commander of United States forces in Viet nam, is suffering from pneu monia but is “making quite pro gressive improvement,” Army medical authorities said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 1 — Vice Presi dent Agnew flew to Saigon un anounced this morning for a one‐day visit to the nation whose lengthy war stimulated the Nixon doctrine of Asian self‐reliance. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 1—A proclaimed 24‐hour allied cease‐fire for New Year's was, shattered last night by 30 significant viola tions that the United States command said claimed the lives of five American soldiers and 40 of the enemy. 
SAIGON, Dec. 31 (AP)—Sen ator Harrison A. Williams Jr., Democrat of New Jersey, made ark unannounced visit to South Vietnam over the Christmas holidays and left Monday, a United States Embassy spokes man said today. Senator Wil liams made the trip partly to investigate black market cur rency manipulations, the sub ject of recent Senate hearings, the spokesman said. 
COPENHAGEN, Denmark, Dec. 31—The Texas industrial ist H. Ross Perot announced tonight that the Soviet Union would not allow him to enter the country to send supplies to American prisoners of war in North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31— The Army announced today that it would try S. Sgt. David Mitchell on charges of assault with intent to murder 30 Viet namese civilians in connection with the alleged massacre at Songmy last year. 
PEARL HARBOR, Hawaii, Jan. 1 (UPI)—The Navy aban doned today all plans to sal vage the deserted munitions Ship Badger State, which has been floating for a week in the mid‐Pacific.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 2—Allied and en emy forces were expected to resume full‐scale offensive operations this morning follow ing the expiration of a widely violated New Year's truce period.
MONTGOMERY, Ala. — Not surprisingly, George Corley Wallace sees the 1970's as the time when George Corley Wallace will have his greatest impact.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 1 (Reuters)—The militant An Quang Buddhist faction pub lished today an account of the alleged massacre at Songmy, containing charges that almost 600 men, women and children were shot and piled four deep in a ditch.
Fifteen pro football players from the National Football League will tour Vietnam and hospitals in the Pacific are for the United Service Organiza tion and the Department of De fense late in January and in February.
PARIS—Perhaps the most sig nificant American foreign pol icy failure over the past decade came neither in Vietnam nor at the Bay of Pigs but in Laos. Had U.S. diplomacy plugged the Laotian sewer already being exploited by Communist guer rillas ten years ago, the sordid drama that subsequently tor tured external and internal U.S. relationships might, have been avoided.
H. Ross Perot expressed disappointment yesterday over his failure to deliver a planeload of “badly needed supplies” to American prison ers of war in North Vietnam but vowed, “I'm not giving up.”
BIENHOA, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 2 — Vice President Agnew consoled wounded American servicemen here to day and said his 24‐hour visit to South Vietnam had “con firmed to me the wisdom of our policies.”
To End Building Bias
HONG KONG, Jan. 1 (Reu ters)—A New Year's communi qué from Vietcong headquarters in South Vietnam describes the military situation as “very good” and instructs troops to kill as many American and Sai gon Government soldiers as possible.
Readers and viewers in this country who think journalists have problems because of occasional pres sure from Washington to tell it like it isn't ought to consider the plight of journalists in uniform in Viet nam who must try to serve two masters—the Army and free expression. In most cases the military ver sion dominates the news in official publications and broadcasts.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Jan. 2 (AP)—The Army defense attor ney for Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. and the prosecution officer left today by plane for personal investigations at Songmy, scene of an alleged massacre.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 2 (UPI) — South Vietnamese servicemen and civil servants will receive a bonus of 4,000 piasters or about $34, for Tet, the lunar new year, the Govern ment announced today. The bonus at Tet, 1969, was 2,000 piasters. Tet, the biggest Viet namese holiday of the year, falls on Feb. 7.
HANOI, North Vietnam— In the curiously relaxed atmosphere of wartime Hanoi, there are a few loudspeakers scattered through the streets and some people rise at 5 A.M. to do exercises.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 2 (AP) — In the first sharp ground action of 1970, an American patrol clashed in a four‐hour battle with North Vietnamese infiltrators near the Cambodian border, mili tary spokesman reported today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 2—“The best Nguyen Van Thieu could hope for,” an ex perienced Western diplomat was saying the other day, “would be another year as good as the last.”
Medical Priorities
TAIPEI, Taiwan, Jan. 3— Vice President Agnew con ferred privately this morning with President Chiang Kai‐shek of Nationalist China less than 24 hours after Mr. Agnew said the United States would seek “meaningful dialogue” with Communist China.
An executive of the United Church of Christ demanded yesterday that chaplains in the armed services be instructed to support officers and enlisted men who refuse to carry out orders they deem “in error, im moral or in violation of the laws and customs of war and crime against humanity.”
CHICAGO, Jan. 2 — A Yip pie‐made film about events at the 1968 Democratic National Convention was barred from evidence today at the Chicago conspiracy trial.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 3 (UPI)—Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, United States com mander in Vietnam, was dis charged from a military hospi tal today, “fully recovered” from pneumonia, a military spokesman said.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3—The Nixon Administration is re ported to be increasingly con cerned that the political and economic situation in South Vietnam is deteriorating and that this could affect the pace of “Vietnamization” of the war.
BIRMINGHAM, Ala., Jan. 3 —As his teen‐age widow clutched a tightly folded flag and his mother wept softly into a handkerchief, the silver gray coffin slid slowly and si lently into the frozen earth and Bill Henry Terry was granted his wish.
When Dean Rusk left the Government last January after serving eight years as Secretary of State, he found he was unable to follow the usual route of Cabinet members into a highly paid job. His back ground qualified him for academe; but his defense of the Vietnam war made him a pariah on northern campuses, and his liberalism on civil rights (and his daughter's marriage to a Negro) made him unwelcome in the South. So he had to content himself with recording memories under a grant from the Rocke feller Foundation. Finally, last week, a job came through. The University of Georgia, after heated con troversy within the state's Board of Regents, hired him as a professor of international law. “I'm honored,” Mr. Rusk said with customary restraint, and he talked of “going back home” where he was born on farm.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 3 —Vice President Agnew said today that the United States allies in Asia understood the Nixon doctrine of regional self reliance, but wanted to hear it again because they are “fright ened” of Communist China.
SAIGON—It was a modest vic tory, at best, for President Nguyen Van Thieu, but it served his purpose.
PARIS, Jan. 3 (AP)—Ambas sador Pham Dang Lam, South Vietnam's chief negotiator at the Paris peace talks, flew to Saigon today for what he called routine discussions with his government. Be said he ex pected to be gone about 10 days.
SAIGON — Have North Viet nam's leaders been forced to re‐evaluate their dream of a de cisive Communist military vic tory in the South and have they begun to prepare their people for a long, inconclusive and per haps futile struggle? Hanoi watchers in Saigon pondered these questions last week as they pored over lengthy news paper articles by North Viet nam's two top military leaders that suggested a possible shift of strategy because of battlefield losses and political and economic problems at home.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 3 — North Vietnamese troops made a third concen trated assault in six days on American soldiers in a field camp last night, killing seven Americans and seriously wounding 11, the United States military command reported to day. The command also reported three instances of firing and shelling attacks by enemy gun ners yesterday from positions inside the demilitarized zone, the first attacks from the zone in more than two months. One shelling resulted in an unspeci fied number of Americans wounded but none killed, Unit ed States headquarters said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 3 (AP)—A television newscaster on the American Forces Vietnam Network charged over the air today that a broadcast on the net work “is not free to tell the truth.”
HONG KONG, Jan. 3 (Reu ters)—A Vietnam peace dele gation, including two Ameri cans, has arrived in Hanoi, the official North Vietnamese press agency said today.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 3 — Miss Ellen Muskie, daughter of Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine and Mrs. Muskie, was married here this after noon to Ernest Michael Allen, a 23‐year‐old veteran who served with the Army in Vietnam.
DEFENSE IS WHOSE BUSINESS?
SYDNEY, Australia, Jan. 3 —A statement made in a United States Senate commit tee hearing on crimes against American servicemen on leave here has aroused concern among Sydney officials.
VINHLONG, South Vietnam, Jan. 3 (AP)—When Tuyet was 6 years old she ran away from her temperamental father and her home in a Saigon slum. She roamed the streets five years and became a leader of a gang of urchins who made their living by picking pockets.
NORTH HOLLYWOOD, Calif., Jan. 3 — President Nixon, dressed in golf clothes, took a couple of stiff practice swings today, felt the small of his back and turned away from his ball in mock agony.
SAIGON, Sunday, Jan. 4 — The South Vietnamese Govern ment reported today that enemy troops fired 40 mortar shells at 3 A.M. today into two refugee camps near Anhoa, southwest of Danang, killing 10 Vietnamese civilians and wounding 50.
Aggressor in Vietnam
CHULAI, South Vietnam, Jan. 3 (AP)—Following a mine sweeping team and a scout dog trained to detect mines and booby traps, Lieut. Gen. Wil liam R. Peers and his Army in vestigators poked through the ruins of Mylai hamlet in the Songmy village complex near here today.
The recent announcement from Sweden that Premier Olof Palme would visit the United States in May explained only that he would go to Gambier, Ohio, to accept an honorary degree from his alma mater, Kenyon College.
SAIGON, South Vietnams Jan. 4 (Reuters) — The de fense and prosecution law yers in the forthcoming mur der trial of First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. arrived here today as a special Army team continued its investigation of the alleged massacre of civil ians by United States troops at Mylai hamlet in the Song my village area of Quangngai Province in March, 1968.
A majority of Americans are more disturbed over publicity given the alleged Songmy mas sacre than they are over the apparent killings, Time maga zine reported yesterday.
VUNGTAU, South Viet nam, Jan. 4 (Reuters) — The Australian beer thirst ended in Vietnam today when the ship Jeparit arrived with 1,632,000 cans of beer.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 4 — Vice President Agnew dis cussed foreign aid and Ameri can dissent with Thai leaders today and then; shoeless, toured Thailand's most famous temple.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 4 (UPI) —The Senate Democratic Lead er, Mike Mansfield of Montana, said today that the Senate should repeal a series of reso lutions that give “extraordinary war powers” to the President.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 5 — The United States command today reported a “significant increase” in enemy activity in the northern most military region yesterday and Saturday, including three, ground attacks that saw two Americans killed and 18 wounded.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 4—American military spokes men, who have quarreled with reporters for years over news in Vietnam, are now encounter ing bitter controversy on the subject in their own ranks.
The three major television networks have protested to Herbert Klein, Director of Com munications of the Nixon Ad ministration, that their camera crews were excluded from cov ering parts of Vice President Agnew's stopover in Saigon.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 5 (AP)—The farmer kneeling before the body of his wife looked up at the old wall clock, which he had set 15 minutes fast to give him an earlier start on the day. “Last night she was alive,” he said to himself.the three Vietcong took them without resistance.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tues day, Jan. 6—The United States command said that enemy sol diers attacked a Marine night camp south of Danang early this morning, killing 11 marines and wounding 59.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 5—The South Vietnaese Senate adopted a resolution to night describing the alleged massacre of Vietnamese civil ians at Songmy as “an isolated act by an American unit and not the policy of the United States armed forces.” The Senators declined to label the incident, on March 16, 1968, as a massacre or even a killing, despite the report of an investigation by the Senate De fense Committee that said that at least 47 men, women and children had been slain at Songmy.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5 (UPI) —The Defense Department an nounced today that Army Spe cialist 4 Charles E. Moore Jr. of Rensselaer, N. Y., had been killed in action in Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 5 (Agence France‐Presse) — Hanoi residents fled from their homes before dawn today as light tremors from the severe earthquake that shook south ern China were felt here.
The Army information officer who described his job as being essentially to make “the military look good” posed the dilemma confronting both the armed forces and the journalists‐in‐uniform broadcasting and writing in Vietnam.
KATMANDU, Nepal, Jan. 5 (Reuters) — Vice President Ag new arrived in this Himalayan kingdom bordering on Tibet to day on a 22‐hour visit that included brief political talks.
CHICAGO, Jan. 5—The de fendants in the Chicago con spiracy trial announced plans today to “indict” Mayor Rich ard J. Daley when he appears as a witness tomorrow.
ROME, Jan. 5 (UPI)—Pope Paul VI assured the wives of seven United States servicemen today he was doing everything he Could to try to help them learn whether their husbands were alive or dead in North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5 (AP) —A group of associates and former campaign workers of Senator Eugene J. McCarthy, Hubert H. Humphrey and the late Robert F. Kennedy an nounced today a campaign to make the 1970 Congressional elections a referendum on the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5—The former editor in chief of the pacific editions of Stars and Stripes said today that “no cen sorship” or “news management” had been applied to his news papers, although there were cases of high‐level military “pressures and complaints.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 5 (AP) —The United States has paid $6,100 to the families of 11 Cambodians who were killed in two border incidents and to 13 Cambodians who were wounded at the same time, the State Department said today.
Power Plant Sites
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 6—Defections by people with connections with the Vietcong were reported to have dropped sharply in De cember, to less than half the number who switched sides in October, a record month.
MOSCOW, Jan. 6 —Pravda charged today that Communist China had been making “un ceasing malicious attacks” on the Soviet Union.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 6 (UPI) —The following servicemen from the New Yorlz area were identified by the Defense De partment today as having been killed in Vietnam:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 6—Infiltration by North Viet namese into South Vietnam in 1969 totaled 100,000 to 110,000 men or 30,000 to 40,000 fewer than in 1968, according to esti mates by allied officials here.As in 1968, they said, infiltra tion rose at year end from a seasonal low point, but the monthly figures for November and December, 1969, were still reported below the 3,500 and 4,503 figures for November and December, 1968.
SAIGON, South. Vietnam, Jan. 6 — An enemy attack that American information officers here first depicted as an as sault on a temporary night en campment of United States Ma rines was revealed today to have been a savage North Vietnamese assault on a heavily fortified Marine battalion head quarters.
PARIS—The greatest success of the Nixon Administration as it closed out 1969 may conceiv ably have been defusing the Vietnamese war. Past predic tions on this intricate problem have been proven wrong by future events but present au guries seem modestly hopeful.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 6—The Vietnam Moratorium Commit tee announced today that it would sponsor nationwide “tax payer rallies” on April 15 and would start a campaign service to help political candidates op posed to the war.
CHICAGO, Jan. 6 — Mayor Richard J. Daley spent about three hours on the witness stand in the Chicago con spiracy trial today but uttered only a few hundred words.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Jan. 7, (Reuters)— Vietcong gunners shot down three American helicopters yes terday in a new outbreak of fighting near Danang. There were no casualties.
KABUL, Afghanistan, Jan. 6 (Reuters)—A brief outburst by left‐wing students marred an otherwise friendly welcome to day for Vice President Agnew, who arrived here for a 19‐hour visit on his 11‐nation tour of Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 8—Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers and two civilian lawyers left here this, Morning after a 12‐day inquiry into the alleged massacre of civilians at Songmy. He said the inquiry had uncovered “some things that will have a bearing” on current court martial proceedings. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 7—A wit ness in the Chicago conspiracy trial accused Judge Julius J. Hoffman today of hampering his testimony with legal nice ties. 
MOSCOW, Jan. 7 (AP)— The father of a missing Unit ed States Marine pilot said today that the North Viet namese Embassy in Moscow has agreed to ask Hanoi whether his son had been captured alive or killed in action. 
A Federal District Judge yesterday threw out a suit by a Queens hospital admin istrator to have the war in Vietnam declared unconstitu tional. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 7 (AP)—New fighting was reported today in South Viet nam's coastal lowlands south of Danang and to the southwest along the Cambodian border. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 8 — The Army said today it had charged Spe cialist 5 Robert E. Lawrence, with disrespect to a superior and failure to obey orders, but asserted that the charges had nothing to do with his broad cast Jan. 3, in which he charged the military with cen‐ soring news broadcasts.
SAIGON, Jan. 7 (Reuters)— The Saigon Government an nounced today that firecrackers would be banned during the Vietnamese Lunar New Year, Tet, next month. Firecrackers are a traditional feature of the observance, but since the Viet cong's nationwide Tet offensive in 1968, the Government has forbidden their use. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 7 (Reuters) — A 24‐hour general strike by thousands of Saigon workers affected docks, factories, fuel companies and some offices today. Tonight it was ordered extended for a day to back demands for a pub lic bus service in this city of three million people. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 7—The State Department said today that North Vietnamese infiltra tion into South Vietnam in 1969 was less than one‐half of the flow in 1968. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8—Two soldiers who were scheduled to leave the Army next week were charged with murder and other offenses today in connection with the alleged killing of civil ians in Songmy, Vietnam, on March 16, 1968.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8—This Is supposed to be a time of pub lic indignation. You can hardly get to work and back these days without reading about or running into somebody demon strating or picketing over some real or imagined grievance. Authority is said to be on the defensive almost everywhere.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 8—United States B‐52 bombers were reported to have struck yesterday and today against suspected enemy posi tions where fighting has in creased recently and where the foe is believed to be concen trating men and supplies.
SCHRUNS, Austria — One casualty of the nineteen seventies will almost certainly be the SEATO alliance devised in 1954 after France was driven from Vietnam and its former colony partitioned. SEATO has never worked in the sense of safeguarding the area it hoped to protect or mustering in its defense all signatory powers, but it did achieve the principal aim seen for it by its sponsor, John Foster Dulles.
The board of trustees of the Museum of Modern Art yesterday elected John High tower, executive director of the New York State Council on the Arts, as director. The appointment ends a search that began last May, when the board ousted Bates Lowry, director for less than 10 months.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 8 (AP) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
To the Editor:
CHICAGO, Jan. 8—Two di vergent wings of the American radical movement went on dis play today at the Chicago con spiracy trial.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 18—The Army broadcaster who accused the United States com mand of censorship last week end took issue today with court martial charges that have been lodged against him in connec tion with a previous incident.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 9 — President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that it would be “impossible and impractical” to withdraw all American combat troops from South Vietnam in 1970.
PARIS, Jan. 8 — The United States today revived a proposal to begin “restricted” sessions of the Vietnam peace talks as “a way of ending sterile de bate.”
STOCKHOLM, Jan. 9 (Reu ters) — The Swedish Govern ment today allocated $775,000 to the International Red Cross for humanitarian aid to Viet nam. The sum was requested by the international organiza tion, which will decide how it will be divided between North and South Vietnam, the Foreign Minister here said. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 9—American infantrymen supported by tanks, artillery and air strikes today reported having killed 109 North Viet namese and Vietcong soldiers in two days of fighting on the slopes of a mountain overlook ing the sprawling American base at Tayninh. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 9 (AP) — Two military newscasters who accused the United States command of cen sorship were transferred today from the American radio and television network to other du ties within the command in Saigon. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 9 — When histories of the Chicago con spiracy trial are written, to day's proceedings will probably go down as “The Great Bath room Debate.” 
RICHMOND, Jan. 9 (AP)— The United States Court of Ap peals for the Fourth Circuit re versed today the convictions of two persons arrested during antiwar demonstrations at the Pentagon two years ago. 
NORTHAMPTON, Mass., Jan. 9 — The convenience of jet travel and the prerogatives of the Presidency made possible a Nixon family reunion tonight in a small apartment near the Smith College campus. The oc casion was the President's 57th birthday. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9— The former director of a pri vate research project in Viet nam said today that his inter viewers turned up evidence in 1966 that South Korean forces had murdered “hundreds” of South Vietnamese civilians. 
A 40‐year‐old hospital ad ministrator whose suit to have the war in Vietnam declared unconstitutional was dismissed in United States District Court earlier this week, was given 10 days in jail yesterday for causing a disturbance in the court. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 9 Reu ters)—President Nixon is plan ning to name a new ambassador to Sweden soon, filling a diplo matic post left vacant for a year because of Washington's displeasure with Swedish sym pathy for North Vietnam. The State Department spokesman, Robert J. McCloskey made the disclosure today but refused to say who the new envoy would be. 
WASHINGTON — If one were looking for conceptual turning points in the long course of American involvement in Asia, they might be found in two Presidential “backgrounders”— one held by President McKin ley, tormented over his decision to turn the Philippines into an American colony, and the other held 70 years later by Presi dent Nixon, tormented by an American war in Vietnam. 
A 33‐year‐old hospital admin istrator who was jailed Fri day for causing a disturbance in United States District Court was released after several hours when Judge George Rosling commuted his 10‐dav sentence. 
Former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey attacked the Nixon Administration yesterday for operating “like a corporate structure” without “a vision of the seventies.” 
The story of the Vietnam war comes in large part from military press officers, and how that story sounds often depends on what terms they use. Recent ly the United States Command indicated it did not like some of the terms being used and issued to its briefing officers a “guidance” directive banning cer tain terms and substituting others. The directive, titled “Let's Say It Right,” included the following changes:
CLINTON, N. C., Jan. 10 (AP) —A Federal judge has ruled that a military base commander has the right to restrict dis tribution of publications that he believes would undermine the morale of his men. 
Elections in Japan
PRINCETON, N. J., Jan. 10 — The Gallup Poll has found that Democrats tend to favor withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam immediately o by the end of the year, while most Republicans favor with drawal only when the South Vietnamese are able to handle the war themselves. 
SAIGON—It was not so much what President Nguyen Van Thieu said at his press confer ence last week as the way he said it that left the 200 news men in his audience with the distinct impression that he had adopted a new, hard line on everything from American troop withdrawals to the motives of his political opposition. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 10 (Reuters)—United States war communiques no longer give the distances of battles from Saigon because the United States command is “trying to eliminate the overemphasis” on their closeness to the capital, a United States spokesman said today. 
If the longest war in the history of the United States, the war that has helped po larize the nation into two camps and radicalize the young people, came to an end tomorrow, the impact on industry and business with little or no direct connection with the war effort would be minimal. 
MOSCOW, Jan. 10—Eugene J. McCarthy, the Senate's most celebrated poet, talked about the human condition, verse and ice hockey today with Andrei Noznesensky, the poet, and Yuri Lyubimov, director of the avant‐garde Taganka Theater. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 10—A staff member of the Rand Cor poration said today that inter views he conducted in Viet nam late in 1966 turned up “hearsay evidence” of South Korean troop atrocities against South Vietnamese civilians. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 10—Enemy troops, firing 15 mortar rounds, inflicted severe casualties last night on Ameri can troops at an artillery base about 300 miles northeast of Saigon, according to United States headquarters. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 12 (AP) — American forces have uncover ed a major North Vietnamese communications center just north of Saigon that intercepted at least 1,400 operational mes sages and presumably com promised some field operations, official sources disclosed today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 11 (Reuters) — United States soldiers were reported today to be continuing to press North Vietnamese troops in Tayninh Province northwest of Saigon. A United States spokesman said that 15 of the enemy had been killed in the area where 61 North Vietnam ese were said to have died in heavy fighting yesterday. 
In Paris during the First World War, the lieutenant in charge of Stars and Stripes, the grandfather of Army newspa pers, placed his managing edi tor, Pvt. Harold W. Ross, under arrest because of an argument over the correct use of a comma. Ross stood in the corner for awhile; then the lieutenant freed the future edi tor of The New Yorker because he didn't know how to put out the paper himself. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Jan. 11 (Agence France‐Presse)—An information bureau of the pro Communist Laotian Patriotic Front was opened here last night. 
PARIS, Jan. 11—The United States delegation to the Viet nam peace talks here is step ping up its pressure on the Communist side to negotiate an end to the war. 
Plight of City People
WASHINGTON, Jan. 11—Sec retary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that alleged atrocities by South Korean troops against South Vietnam ese civilians were not the re sponsibility of the United States command in Vietnam. 
MINEOLA, L. I., Jan. 12— A 26‐year‐old mother of two who had been searched, handcuffed and fingerprinted before being released in $500 bail for having flown the American flag upside down in an antiwar protest was freed from bail today and will stand trial on March 17. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 12—The toughest problem for President Nixon in pursuing “Vietnamiza tion” of the war may not be those domestic critics who think that, at best, the scheme will take too long and, at worst, that it is a plan for fighting a proxy war ad infinitum. Presi dent Thieu of South Vietnam is likely to cause more trouble than any of these unheeded voices. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 12—A de fense witness said today that he had been told that Mayor Richard J. Daley was blocking permits for demonstrators to sleep in parks two weeks be fore the 1968 Democratic Na tional Convention here. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 12 — Last April, a small group of militant students at Hamp ton Institute in Virginia de manded the resignation of the college's president; Dr. Jerome Heartwell Holland.
PARIS, Jan. 12 (Reuters)— Senator Eugene McCarthy, who led an election‐year po litical revolt against Amer ican policy in Vietnam, con ferred today with Vietcong and American peace negoti ators 
Martin Luther King's birth day will be observed with spe cial programs and memorial services by many organizations in the city on Thursday, al though the day is not a legal holiday. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 12—The United States mil itary command announced here today that the First Infantry Division would be the major combat element to leave South Vietnam in the third phase of President Nixon's withdrawal program. 
MOSCOW, Jan. 12 (Reuters)I —The wives of four American pilots missing in Vietnam said today that they were abandon ing attempts to seek the help of Soviet officials in getting news of their husbands. 
Soviet Mideast Aims
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13—An odd thing is now happening in world politics. The small and middle nations, which used to be afraid that the United States and the Soviet Union would blow up the world, now seem to be afraid that Washington and Moscow will get together and organize the world in their own national interests and against the interest of many other nations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 13 (Reuters)—President Nguyen Van Thieu today again strongly criticized advocates of coalition or neutralism in South Vietnam, calling them political witches and racketeers. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13 (AP) —Tex Ritter, former Western singing star and a candidate for the Republican nomination for the Senate from Tennessee, said today he agrees with President Nixon's Vietnam pol icy. Mr. Ritter, 65 years old, came to Washington to meet party leaders, Tennessee Re publicans and reporters. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13— Two teams of scientists have reported that they found that United States defoliation efforts in the Vietnam war had damaged rubber production in adjacent Cambodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 13—Analysts here say they do at expect enemy forces to mount a major military offen sive during the three‐day Tet, or Lunar New Year, holiday next month. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 13 (AP)—United States troops, pursuing a North Vietnamese force in foothills west of Tam ky, captured a freshly built base camp today in an area where enemy troop concentra tions have been renorted. 
CANBERRA, Australia, Jan. 13 — Vice President Agnew greeted Australians today with a pledge of partnership in the Pacific and a friendly wave to antiwar demonstrators. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13—The firpt complete study of student protests last year at colleges and, universities shows that most were nonviolent and did not interrupt routine, that new left groups were a minor fac tor, and that the protesters were less concerned with the Vietnam war and related is sues than with conditions on the campuses. 
PARIS, Jan. 13 (AP)—Sena tor Eugene McCarthy spent four and a half hours in “cor dial and informative conversa tion” today with Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's chief delegate to the Paris peace talks, a spokesman for Mr. CcCarthy said. 
Leonard Boudin, counsel for the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee, an nounced here yesterday that he would represent Specialist 5 Robert Lawrence, the Army newscaster who was removed from his television assignment in Saigon after he had charged the military authnrities with censoring of news broadcasts. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 13 — Julian Bond, the black state legis lator from Georgia, said today that Tom Hayden told him several months before the 1968 Democratic National Conven tion that he feared “police violence” here during the con vention. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13— The Army announced today that it was going to transfer to Fort McPherson, Ga., or nearby bases most of the ac tive‐duty servicemen connect ed with the investigation into alleged atrocities at Songmy, South Vietnam. 
Assessing Blame in Massacres
WASHINGTON Jan. 14— The Army's investigation of the alleged massacre at Songmy has been widened to include 13 soldiers and 18 former soldiers, five more men than were pre viously known to be under scrutiny. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 14 (Reuters)—The chief of staff of the North Vietnamese Army's. Second Division has defected to the South Vietnamese side, a military spokesman said today. He added that Col. Dang Toa presented himself to a company of South Vietnamese militia men in Quangnam Province, 1.7 miles southwest of Danang yes terday. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 14 (AP)—Field reports said to day the crew of a United States Navy river patrol boat and Army helicopter gunships en‐ gaged 10 to 15 North Vietnam ese soldiers trying to cross the Saigon River about 18 miles north of the capital and killed eight of the enemy with ma chine‐gun fire.
MINEOLA, L. I., Jan. 14— The Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court and the State Attorney General were asked by the Nassau County Executive today to investigate the treatment received in court by a 26‐year‐old mother of two who was arrested for flying the American flag upside down as an antiwar protest. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 14 — The Senate Foreign Relations Committee plans to open its public hearings on the Vietnam war on Feb. 2, committee sources said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Jan. 15—The Saigon police broke up a meeting this morning at the An Quang Pa goda in which militant Bud dhist students had called on the people to rise up in a national campaign for peace. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 14—A col lege student said today that his arm had been broken by Chi cago policemen as they pulled him from a statue in Grant Park during demonstrations at the 1968 Democratic National Con vention here. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 14 (AP) —The following servicemen from the New York area were identified by the Defense De partment today as having been killed in Vietnam:
BANMETHUOT, South Viet nam, Jan. 14 (Reuters)—Presi dent Nguyen Van Thieu said today he expected to announce a reorganization of South Viet nam's armed forces later this year. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 14— The wife of Senator Philip A. Hart, Democrat of Michigan, and seven co‐defendants went on trial today for breaking Federal building violations by attempt ing to hold an ecumenical mass for peace inside the Pentagon last Nov. 13. 
CANBERRA, Australia, Jan. I4—Vice President Agnew ap peased one set of Australian critics today but avoided a con frontation with another. 
MINEOLA, L.I., Jan. 15—The use of the American flag with the peace symbol displayed across its face was declared to be a violation of state law today by Nassau County District At torney William Cahn. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15— About 1,250,000 Americans will lose their jobs as a result of reductions in military man power and spending either already made or planned in the next defense budget, De fense Secretary Melvin R. Laird said today. 
PARIS, Jan. 15—Ha Van Lau, North Vietnam's repre sentative at the Paris peace talks, said at the 50th session of the talks today that President Nixon's three criteria for the withdrawal of United States forces “in fact can never be met.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 15—Enemy gunners are re ported to have fired about 100 mortar rounds into an allied artillery base near Cambodia and then launched a ground attack that died out after an hour of intense fighting. Allied soldiers killed 29 of the enemy, while suffering light casualties, military spokesmen reported here. 
AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Friday, Jan. 16—Vice President Agnew said here today that Senator J. William Fulbright “apparently has blown his cool again.” 
CHICAGO, Jan. 15—Oppo nents of the Vietnam war an nounced today the formation of a committee to “facilitate communication between serv icemen held in North Vietnam and their relatives in the United States.” 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15—That incorrigible football buff, Rich ard M. Nixon, has come to the end of the first quarter with his “game plan” intact. Like his friend Vince Lombardi of the Washington Redskins, he is sticking to fundamentals and controlling the ball. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Jan. 16—Senator Tran Van Don and 14 other members of the South Vietnamese Senate announced today the formation of a political bloc that they said would become the nucleus of a wider opposition front. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15 (UPI) —The Pentagon today identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15 (Reu ters)—Secretary of State Wil liam P. Rogers said tonight that President Nixon's decision to end the United States com bat role in the Vietnam war was “irreversible” and would lead to the eventual removal of all American troops. 
SEOUL, South Korea, Jan. 15 — The South Korean Defense Ministry denied today as “un founded” and “deplorable” the charges that South Korean troops had murdered hundreds of South Vietnamese civilians. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 15— Arlo Guthrie found out today you can't “get anything you want” in Judge Julius J. Hoffman's courtroom. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 15 (AP) —A peace fellowship group, in cluding two clergymen now on trial for an earlier incident, conducted a mass without in terference today on the steps of the Pentagon. 
HUNTSVILLE, Ala., Jan. 16 (UPI)—Gen. William C. West moreland, former commander of United States forces in Viet nam, said today that the Army “is not trying to hide any thing” in the investigation of the alleged Mylai massacre. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan 16 (AP) — Vietcong guerillas invaded a hamlet near Songmy early today and hurled dyna mite charges into houses, kill ing 16 persons and wounding 21, an American spokesman said. 
TACOMA, Wash., Jan. 16 (AP)—A breach of contract complaint against the Army was filed yesterday in Federal District Court by an attorney for one of the four soldiers charged in connection with the alleged Mylai massacres. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16 (AP) —The Pentagon today identifiedthe following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
The additional cutbacks in defense spending, sketched by Defense Secretary Laird the other day, need to be put in perspective lest they seem larger than they are. They amount only to the reductions in spending to come from a scaling down of opera tions in Vietnam plus a little more trimmed here and there from a bloated budget. They represent no fundamental shifts in strategy, much less any reorder ing of priorities. 
AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Jan. 16 (AP)—Vice President Agnew, winding up his Asian tour, declared tonight that the United States and its allies must stand firm in Vietnam and not be swayed by antiwar factions. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16— Three servicemen listed as missing in North Vietnam may be prisoners of war, according to new information received by the Defense Department. 
STANFORD, Calif. The fundamental flaw in the Administration's program for Vietnamizing the war is that it does not facilitate the very compromise settlement that President Nixon has announced as his objective. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16—The director of information for the armed forces denied today that military officials censor the ra dio and television stations that broadcast news to United States servicemen overseas. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 16—Richard N. Goodwin, an aide to Presi dent Kennedy and President! Johnson, testified today that he knew of “no plan for viol ence” by demonstrators at the Democratic Convention here in 1968. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16 (UPI) — Mrs. Philip A. Hart, whose husband is not only Michigan's senior Senator but also a ranking member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, testified in a suburban Virginia Federal magistrate court today as a co‐defendant with seven other persons arrested for par ticipating in an unauthorized eucharistic mass in the con course of the Pentagon last No vember. 
JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Jan. 16 (UPI) — American Legion mem bers here began today a na tional fund‐raising drive to col lect $200,000 for a legal de fense fund for Army Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr., accused of murdering 110 Vietnamese ci vilians. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 16—A student at Saigon Uni versity said today that in 1966 he interviewed at least 100 refugees who told him stories or gave eyewitness accounts of indiscriminate killings and de struction by South Korean sol diers in Phuyen Province. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 12 — After 20 months of running a hostel for Saigon's shoeshine boys and homeless children, a 26‐year‐old actor and newsman, Richard Hughes, is turning his humanitarian en deavor into a purely Vietna mese‐run program. 
PHOENIX, Ariz., Jan. 17 (AP) —The Rev. Robert V. Moss, president of the two‐million member United Church of Christ, said today that he would spend Easter in Vietnam to “assist chaplains in minister ing to combat troops.” Dr. Moss, here for the dedication of the $8‐million Beatitudes Re tirement Home, said the soldiers bear burdens “far heavier than most of us realize.” 
WASHINGTON—As the 91st Congress returns this week for its second session, Congressional Democrats suddenly find them selves bereft of issues at the very time they are casting around for political points to use against a Republican Administra tion in the Congressional elec tions next fall. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 17 (AP)—The wives of four Amer ican fliers missing in Vietnam flew to Laos today to seek the assistance of North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao officials in obtaining information about their husbands. 
SYRACUSE, Jan. 17 — Six Democratic politicians who want to be Governor, United States Senator or State Attor ney General sought some early traction for their bandwagons today here in the icy heartland of New York. 
THE old John Wesley House, a splendid campus landmark with white Ionic columns, turned into the Malcolm X House one sunny day last April. Overnight it became a conspicuous presence on the startled New England landscape. The sky did not fall and the earth did not tremble; neither did the alumni with draw their support. But Wesleyan, a small, estimable, historically white university in Middletown, would never be the same. “We have passed the point of no return,” says a Wes leyan administrator. “The blacks are here in force and they are here to stay.”
SAIGON — Will the enemy launch an offensive during the Tet Lunar New Year holidays next month?
Credit for Nixon
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 17 (AP) — The United States Command said today that the Vietcong had hauled two Amer ican captives from one village to another, placed them on ex hibition and then shot them to death. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam— A middle‐aged man with mud‐stained ankles plods be hind a water buffalo in a landlord's flooded rice field, while hoping that the com batants on both sides of the war will leave him alone. That has been the picture of the South Vietnamese farm er for the past five years. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam— Like a patient undergoing harsh cure, the South Viet namese economy was still gasping at the end of 1969 from a dose of bitter medi cine administered in the fall by President Nguyen Van Thieu. 
Penn Central Service
The Committee of Liaison With Families of Servicemen Detained in North Vietnam, or ganized by antiwar activists to facilitate the exchange of mail between American prisoners held in North Vietnam and their families, opens its office today at 365 West 42d Street, accord ing to the chairman of the group. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam—As South Vietnam concluded a decade of war and faced the prospect of a reduced American presence in the coming dec ade, the need to attract foreign capital for reconstruction and growth took on a special urgency. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 18— President Nixon's State of the Union Message Thursday is eagerly awaited in Washington, but it is not likely to be as revealing or profoundly impor tant—to him, to his staff, per haps even to the country— as his speech to the nation on Viet nam last Nov. 3. 
NHATRANG, South Vietnam, Jan. 18—With army helicopters circling overhead for protec tion, 73 riders set off this morn ing on what must qualify as the world's most hazardous sports event: a six‐day bicycle race through half the length of South Vietnam. 
COLUMBIA, S. C., Jan. 18— One of the loudest, if not the largest, protest marches ever held in this city took place without incident today over the closing of the UFO, one.of the nation's first antiwar cof feehouses. 
Michael I. Brody Jr., who has been writing checks to strangers for thousands Of dollars, says he made his decision to give away what he calls it $25‐million inheri tance while “I was tripped out on drugs.” 
Asia's cities are pouring more of their re sources into solving the problems that spring from rapid population increases. Expressways are unrolling in Japan and Australia. Singa pore is in the middle of a housing boom. But for the urban centers in South Vietnam, the struggle is to rebuild, a process that will re quire major aid from foreign sources.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 18 (AP)—The wives of four United States airmen missing for four years arrived here today hoping for information about their hus bands from North Vietnamese or Pathet Lao officials. The women, all from California, said they had written to North Viet namese and Pathet Lao officials in Laos several times without getting replies. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 18 (AP)—Three American heli copters were shot down over the weekend, the United States command said today. Five crew men were wounded. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day the names of the following servicemen from the New York: area as having been killed in Vietnam:
MINEOLA, L. I., Jan. 19— About 100 representatives of peace groups picketed the of fices of Nassau County District Attorney William Cahn today to protest his ruling that the use of an American flag with symbols displayed across its face was a violation of state law. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 19—An American Marine captain was acquitted tonight by a general court‐martial of the premeditated murder of a North Vietnamese prisoner of war. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19—The Soviet Union said today that it would broadcast statements attributed to American prison ers in North Vietnam, and the State Department responded with a formal diplomatic com plaint. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 19 — South Vietnamese military spokesmen said that 18 persons, including 16 South Vietnamese officer cadets and their instruc tor, were killed today when two Claymore mines that they say were planted by the Vietcong exploded in their training area about 12 miles northeast of Sai gon this morning. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 19—President Nguyen Van Thieu was reported today to have ordered the shifting of three more South Vietnamese commanding generals in what informed sources said was a major shake‐up brought about, at least in part, by American pressure to improve the per formance of the army. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 18—An increasing number of senior American military planners are coming to believe that enemy commanders in Vietnam are building toward a major coun trywide offensive this summer, rather than next month as previously thought. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 20 (Reuters) — A Vietcong sharpshooter killed a United States Army colonel while he was flying in an observation helicopter, the United States command announced today. 
Illegal War
CHICAGO, Jan. 19 — A for mer high‐ranking Justice De partment official testified to day that the department made unsuccessful efforts to get Chi cago officials to negotiate with demonstrators prior to the 1968 Democratic National Conven tion here. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Jan. 19 — First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., charged with killing 109 Vietnamese men, women and children at Songmy, de clined to testify today at a hearing on an additional charge that he murdered a Vietnamese civilian about six weeks prior to the alleged Sonamy action. 
TOKYO, Jan. 19 (Reuters)— A former leftwing student leader was given a 10‐month jail sentence today for having ordered six other students to invade a United States Army hospital in March, 1968. The court reserved judgment on six other radicals who led demonstrations protesting the opening of the hospital, at Camp Oji in Tokyo's northern suburbs, for treatment of wounded United States service men from Vietnam. Several hundred persons were injured in the rioting. 
I SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 19 (AP)—A rescue helicopter has located three American helicopter crewmen who had evaded the enemy for three days and lifted them to safety only 50 feet from a North Viet namese patrol, the United States Army announced today. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 — Congress came back to the Capitol today with the state of the nation's economy as its chief concern. 
President Thieu's replacement of three major tac tical commanders in the Mekong Delta brings critical ly needed changes in the South Vietnamese Army.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20—The United States expressed con ern today over the rising level of fighting in Laos. A State Department spokesman said it appeared that North Vietnam might be preparing to launch a “dry season offen sive” there.
PARIS, Jan. 20 (AP)—Secre tary General Thant of the Unit ed Nations said today that South Vietnam's top priority was a “broad‐based govern ment.” He was immediately ac cused by Saigon's peace‐talk team of meddling.
NHATRANG, South Vietnam, Jan. 20 (UPI)—The defense won a six‐week delay today in the court‐martial of a 20‐year‐old American solider charged with murdering a South Vietnamese man last September.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Jan. 20 — A report that President Nixon, Commander in Chief of American armed forces, had personally urged a murder trial for First Lieut. William L. Cal ley Jr. was submitted today by defense counsel as an argument that the lieutenant could never receive a fair trial in a military court.
CHICAGO, Jan. 20—More than a month before the 1968 Democratic National Conven tion here, a United States Assistant Attorney General warned there might be a “na tional disaster” in Chicago's streets unless city officials and demonstrators developed a “working relationship.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20— Archbishop Giovanni Benelli, the Deputy Secretary of State at the Vatican, said today that he hoped that war‐torn Nigeria would accept relief aid from the Vatican..
WASHINGTON, Jan. 20 (UPI) —The Army told Representa tive Lionel Van Deerlin today that it was investigating charges that a United States infantry company used a South Viet namese village for “target prac tice.” The California Democrat released a letter from Maj. Gen. William A. Becker saying that reports that a ninth Infantry company division fired on vil lage huts in June, 1969, near Dongtam in the Mekong Delta were under active investiga tion. The allegations had been made by an Army doctor, Capt. J. L. Sugarman.
CHICAGO, Jan. 20—A police firearms expert told a coroner's jury today that a bullet re covered from the body of the slain Black Panther leader Fred Hampton was from a 30‐caliber carbine.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 20 (UPI)—Military investigators studying charges that the American Forces Vietnam Net work censors news broadcast to servicemen in the war zone agreed today that the network had not violated Defense De partment policies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 21 (AP)—The United States has given $50‐million more to South Vietnam to aid in financing im ports, it was announced today.
WASHINGTON,. Jan. 21 — Some. South Vietnamese refu gees told American researchers in Saigon in 1968 of “exces sive and misdirected” allied bombing and shelling that made many of them hostile to the South Vietnamese Government.
CHICAGO, Jan. 22 (UPI)—A 1968 campaign aide to Senator Eugene J. McCarthy told a Fed eral court jury today that the Senator's staff antiwar protest leaders had an informal work ing agreement before and dur ing the turbulent Democratic National Convention.
CHICAGO, Jan. 21—An air of unreality hangs over the trial of the so‐called “Chicago Seven,” and not merely be cause it keeps turning up such witnesses as Country Joe, the leader of the rock group known as Country Joe and the Fish.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 21—Enemy gunners fired rock ets and mortars into 55 military and civilian targets in South Vietnam last night in the most extensive shellings in seven weeks.
DINHQUAN, South Viet nam, Jan. 21 (AP) — The Vietcong delayed the Tour de Vietnam bicycle race for three hours today by attack ing South Vietnamese troops clearing the highway. One Government soldier was re ported killed.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 21 (Agence France‐Presse) — The chargé d'affaires of North Vietnam here said today that Hanoi would not publish the list of American pilots it holds prisoner.
TEL AVIV, Jan. 21 (Reuters) —A seven‐man South Vietnam ese delegation led by Senator Tran Van Don, a former gen eral who now is a member of the South Vietnamese Senate Committee for National Secu rity, arrived here today to study technical aspects of the Israeli defense forces.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 21 (AP) —Lieut. Terrence P. Ryan of Summit, N. J., of the Navy, has died of wounds suffered in the Vietnam war, the Pentagon an nounced today.
TACOMA, Wash., Jan. 21 —In a quiet block far from the noise and the neon glitter of Tacoma's G.I. town, the coffee house sits almost hid den in a narrow, shabby store front.
President Nixon's promise of a separate “State of the World” report to Congress may explain in part why he limited his foreign‐policy comments to gener alities. But, in that case, it is puzzling why he gave the subject 1,000 words of platitudes and optimistic predictions of peace in our time, skimming over some of the grimmer realities that face the United States. 
French Arms to Arabs
WASHINGTON, Jan. 22—The prospects for peace Vietnam were described today by President Nixon as far greater than they were a year ago. He foresaw a good pros‐ pect of “a generation of unin terrupted peace” for America.
CHICAGO, Jan. 22 — Songs and movements have no place in the Chicago conspiracy trial, Judge Julius J. Hoffman ruled today.
CHICAGO, Jan. 22 (AP) — Eleven Soviet newsmen, on their way to visit Mayor Rich ard J. Daley today, got trapped in a City Hall elevator. 
Following is a transcript of President Nixon's State of the Union Message to Congress yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times: 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 22—The Business Executive Move for Vietnam Peace charged today that the rejection of its radio spot commercials is a denial of free speech and violation of the Federal Communications Commission's fairness doctine.
SAIGON, Jan. 22 (Reuters)— A new strain of “miracle” rice that combines high yields with better taste is being introduced to South Vietnam, which is al ready nearing self‐sufficiency in its staple food, the United States Embassy said today. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 22 (AP) — The Army reported today that it had added another sol dier to the list of those being investigated for possible charges in the alleged massacre at the South Vietnamese village of Songmy. Thirty‐two soldiers and former soldiers are now considered suspects. The latest suspect was not identified. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 22 (UPI)—Senator Jacob K. Javits, Republican of New York arrived in South Vietnam today on his first visit here in four years. The Senator, who is a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, told newsmen that he planned to study the Vietnamization pro gram, the withdrawal of United States forces and foreign policy relations between the United States and the Government of South Vietnam. 
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Jan. 22 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese Government today banned the Jan. 19 issue of Life magazine, saying an article on the alleged massacre at Songmy included “extremely violent” pictures. 
CHAUDOC, South Vietnam, Jan. 21—Here on the edge of the Mekong Delta and else where in the flat, fertile area life has become dangerous for civilians in recent months and progress of the pacification pro gram has slowed. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 22 (AP)—Striking from a forest stronghold, enemy forces assaulted a command post of a South Vietnamese Marine bri gade in what was termed the biggest attack in the Mekong Delta in two months. 
PARIS, Jan. 22—The Viet cong asserted today that South Korean and South Vietnamese troops massacred more than 700 villagers last November in a pacification sweep command ed by Americans. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 23 — Officials of the State Depart ment said today that North Vietnam had recently massed more troops and military sup plies on the edge of the Plaine des Jarres in Laos than ever before. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 23—An un equivocal stand against violent demonstrations at the 1968 Democratic National Conven tion here was read into the record at the Chicago con spiracy trial today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 23 (AP)—The South Viet namese Government demon strated today that it could con duct a bicycle race along 290 miles of its roads so long as several thousand soldiers were available to protect the cyclists. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 23 (Reuters) — A United States spokesman said today that B‐52's struck targets around a Mekong Delta prov ince today and in a province near Saigon. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 23 (UPI)—North Vietnamese reg ulars and Pathet Lao guerrillas were reported gaining ground against Laotian defenders today in a three‐pronged drive to take the strategic Plaine des Jarres. 
DELRAY BEACH, Fla.
WASHINGTON—With “Viet namization” of the Vietnam war sufficiently established in the conversation of this city that most statesmen can roll the word out without dropping a syllable, there now is a new semantic challenge: the “Euro peanization” of the defense of Europe. 
SYRACUSE, N. Y., Jan. 24— The Democratic State Com mittee urged President Nixon today “to move promptly and decisively toward a complete military withdrawal” from Viet nam. 
In 1967, Lieut. Gen. Lewis B. Hershey, then director of the Selective Service, sent a letter to draft boards throughout the country in which he encouraged them to accelerate induction of young men who turned in their draft cards in protest against the Vietnam war. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 24 (Reuters)—A Saigon military court has sentenced a young South Vietnamese musician to five years at hard labor for com posing antiwar songs, the Souht Vietnamese press agency said today. The musician was identi fied as Phan Van Thang, alsoi known as Mien Duc Thang. 
Judge Julius J. Hoffman, 74, has not been partial to young folk singers who have tried to sing their protest songs at the Chicago trial of seven defend ants charged with conspiring to start a riot at the 1968 Demo cratic national convention. Even the lilting soprano of pretty pop star Judy Collins did not move him last week. “No, no, no sing ing,” he ruled, when Miss Collins broke into a rendition of “Where Have All the Flowers Gone?” during her testimony for the de fense. “We are not here to be entertained.”
CHICAGO, Jan. 24—A radi cal leader and a lawyer for the City of Chicago traded barbed aphorisms on the eve of the 1968 Democratic National Con vention here, a witness told the Chicago conspiracy trial today. 
ASERIES of lively, though unscheduled art events has been occurring at the Museum of Mod ern Art this past year—and not exactly with MOMA's wholehearted cooperation. I'm referring to the demon strations put on by the de termined and somewhat stud iedly seedy disorganization known as the Art Workers Coalition. (The AWC, in case you've just come in, is a loose‐knit group of museo phobic artists, writers, film makers and epheaneralists, who seek—without the aid of foundation money—to re form the art world structure. They have presented MOMA with an 11‐point list of de mands, ranging from free ad mission at all times to the establishment of a section de voted Ito the work of black and Puerto Rican artists.)
Korean Reprisal Policy
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 24 — A military survey of race relations at United States Army bases throughout the world has concluded that “all indications point to an increase in racial tensions.” 
COEDUCATION AT BENNINGTON
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Jan. 25—Waves of United States B‐52 bombers at tacked suspected enemy bases along the Cambodian and Lao tion borders northwest of Saigon yesterday and early today, mili tary, spokesman said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 24 (UPI)—South Vietnam pro tested to the International Con trol Commission today charg ing that 4,619 civilians were killed and 14,412 injured by Communist terrorist acts in 1969. 
It is 25 years since Cordell Hull, as Secretary of State, was lecturing the colonial powers “in relation to dependent peoples who aspire to liberty.” It is a dozen years since Richard Nixon, as Vice President, spent a month touring eight African states and came back to urge strong diplomatic links and a recognition of their development needs. It is 10 years since John Kennedy, as Presi dential candidate, paid $100,000 out of family funds for an airlift of 260 African students to American col leges, and so impressed men like Tom Mboya with this prompt gesture of practical help. Any number of anniversaries can be cited to suggest the time has come for a long and cool look at the relationship of the United States with independent Africa.
In the lofty tones of his first State of the Union Message, President Nixon endeavored to give voice the state of the American mind. He placed his empha sis on the desire for peace rather than victory in Vietnam, on reform of existing institutions rather than creation of new ones at home, and on improve ment of the quality of life rather than on the quantity of material growth for the people of this country and the world.
FORT GORDON, Ga. Jan. 22 —Four Army privates who tried to open their own Investigation of war crimes are awaiting trial by special court‐martial on charges of undermining loyalty, morale and discipline. 
OTTAWA, Jan. 25 (AP)— Prime Minister Wilson of Britain arrived here today on his way to Washington for talks with President Nixon.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 25—Sta tistics on United States spend ing for the war in Vietnam show that the conflict is provid ing significant benefits for the economies of South Korea and the Philippines as well as help ing to shore up their military establishments.
Financial pressures, and later the requirements of the Vietnam war, provided the original impetus in Washington for troop cuts in Europe. But the renewed debate has a very different financial base from that involved in the reductions that have already cut American forces in Europe by one‐quarter from the peak levels of the last decade.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 25—Senator Jacob K. Javits Jeft Saigon today after a four‐day visit that he said had served to confirm his view that the United States should withdraw its troops from South Vietnam “at the earliest possible date.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Jan. 26 (Reuters) — A United States military spokesman said today that helicopter gunships and Air Force fighter‐bombers attacked yesterday what was described as the first convoy of North Vietnamese supply trucks sighted in South Vietnam's Ashau valley since last summer.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 (UPI) — Senator Stephen M. Young, Democrat of. Ohio, re signed from the American Le gion today because, he said, one post has started raising funds to defend Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., charged with mur dering civilians at My Lai, South Vietnam. The post is in Cleveland, and Senator‐ Young was a charter member of it. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26 (Reuters) — The wives of four United States airmen shot down over North Vietnam vis ited a military hospital here where wounded North Vietna mese prisoners are treated. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 (UPI) — George Romney said today that he had no plans to run for Senator this year. But he declined to rule out the possibility that he or his wife might become a candidate if Michigan Republicans cannot agree on someone else. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26—President Nguyen Van Thieu, who was elected in 1967 with only 37 per cent of the vote, proposed tonight that run‐off elections be held if no presidential candidate won a majority on the first ballot in future elections. 
Howard J. Samuels, who be gan putting together a cam paign organization 10 months ago, made it official yesterday by announcing that he would seek the Democratic nomina tion for Governor. 
Senator Charles E. Goodell told the Women's City Club yesterday that the time for rhetoric was past and the need now was for “money muscle” from Washington to meet the nation's urgent domestic needs. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 26 (AP)—The United States Command reported today in creased battle action by both allied and enemy forces in all four military zones of South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the fol lowing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
VUNGTAU, South Vietnam, Jan. 25 — Hunched low over their small motorbikes, four Americans in plastic helmets and motorcycle jackets roared down this afternoon from the hill overlooking this beach re sort and bounced over the sand to the edge of the sea. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 26 — Judge Julius J. Hoffman said today that, as far as he was con cerned, Mayor Richard J. Daley of Chicago was “a good Mayor.” 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 26— President Nguyen Van Thieu said in Saigon a couple of weeks ago that he was com piling a list of arms, materials and funds that he expected to get from the United States as American troops are withdrawn and South Vietnamese forces take over more of the fighting. 
FORT PENNING, Ga., Jan. 27 (AP)—The Army must spell out whether it will try to prove) that First Lieut. William L. Cal‐1 ley Jr. personally killed Viet namese civilians ordered others! to do it, or both, a military, judge ruled today.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 — The United States used a Cam bodian sect dedicated to the overthrow of the legitimate government of Cambodia on covert missions into that coun try in 1967, according to testi mony at the trial of a Green Beret captain convicted in 1968 of killing one of the members of the sect.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 (AP) —In a two‐year period, while the United States committed ex tensive sums for the war in Vietnam, South Vietnam col lected $28‐million to $34‐mil lion in taxes from the United States Government.
Four men who competed in a recent National and Ameri can Football League champion ship series are among 15 play ers named yesterday to tour United States military bases, hospitals and outposts in the far east, including the war zones of South Vietnam.
CHICAGO, Jan. 27 (AP)—A high police official testified to day that a Cleveland professor hit him and threw a traffic bar rier toward a sergeant in street disorders the week of the Democratic National Conven tion in 1968.
ALBANY, Jan. 27—Hoping for a lively debate, if not ap proval, 26 Assembly Democrats introduced a resolution today urging immediate withdrawal from Vietnam by United States troops.

CHICAGO, Jan. 27—“Wow!” said Norman Mailer when he first heard the Yippie strategy for the 1968 Democratic Nation al Convention here.
SAIGON, Wednesday, Jan. 28 (AP) — President Nguyen Van Theiu is planning to order a cease‐fire for the Tet lunar new year but has not decided the length or timing, a Govern ment spokesman said today.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27—In what has become an almost an nual rite of British‐American friendship, Prime Minister Wil son arrived here amid pomp and ceremony for a round of talks with President Nixon and other senior United States offi cials.
A Federal judge in Brooklyn said yesterday he would seek the convening of a three‐judge constitutional court to rule on the use of peace symbols in conjunction with the American Flag.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 (UPI) —The Pentagon announced to day the names of 19 American servicemen killed in Vietnam. The list included Specialist 4 Nathaniel Thomas, of the Army, of Elmira, N. Y.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 27 (AP)—The withdrawal of 50,000 more American troops will begin tomorrow with 3,000 marines from 19 units leaving over a five‐day period, the, United States Command an nounced today.
A capacity crowd of 21,000 was at Madison Square Garden last night to see performers ranging in style from East Har lem to Las Vegas in a benefit for the Vietnam Moratorium Committee. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 28 (AP)—United States troops searching through a huge enemy arms cache in the jungles northwest of Saigon uncovered two and a half tons of arms and nearly 250,000 rounds of ammunition, American head quarters said today. 
PRINCETON, N. J., Jan. 28— Support for President Nixon's. Vietnam policies is holding firm, the Gallup Poll reported today. 
Transit as State Issue
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 28 (AP)—The United States command today denied charges that unfavorable news reports were censored by the Armed Forces Vietnam Network. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 28 —Judge Julius J. Hoffman barred Ram sey Clark, the former United States Attorney General, from testifying today as a witness for the defense in the Chicago conspiracy trial. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 (UPI) —The Pentagon today identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
Bishop Odd Hagen, president of the World Methodist Council since 1966, died yesterday after a short illness, according to word received from Stockholm. He was 64 years old. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 28 (AP) — American officials said today that two United States Government agents were infiltrated into the Saigon press corps but were withdrawn aft er their identity had been ex posed. 
Responding to the firing at an Ameri can reconnaissance plane over North Viet nam, American fighter‐bombers attacked a missile site inside North Vietnam on Wednes day, the United States command in Saigon announced early today. One of the attack ing planes and a rescue helicopter were shot down. Washington officials said the incident did not reflect a change in American pol icy. [Page 1, Column 1.]
CHICAGO, Jan. 29 (AP)— Two free lance photographers testified yesterday that they saw a deputy superintendent of police beat an antiwar leader during street violence the week of the 1968 Democratic Na tional Convention.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan 29—The United States Ambas sador, Ellsworth Bunker, today described 1969 as a year of meaningful progress in South Vietnam, but conceded that the enemy “is still a military force to be reckoned with.”
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29— “The Silent Majority,” a con troversial film produced by the United States Information Agency to show that President Nixon has ample public sup port for his policies in Vietnam, has been less than a smash hit abroad.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 29 (AP) —A student antiwar group an nounced today a conference, open to the entire antiwar movement, in Cleveland Feb. 14–15 to plan a spring ac tion campaign.
CHICAGO, Jan. 29—Bobby G. Seale returned to the Chicago conspiracy trial today and fi nally got a chance to speak out at length.
The much‐abused riders on all the mass transit lines in the metropolitan area are on the verge of open rebel lion. The latest affront is the Metropolitan Transporta tion Authority's order for higher fares on the Long Island Rail Road, effective tomorrow—an order so certain to stir additional outrage that the Long Island trainmen are threatening to strike unless they get police protection.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Jan. 30—United States fighter‐bombers attacked an antiaircraft missile base 90 miles inside North Vietnam on Wednesday after an unarmed American reconnaissance plane was fired upon by missiles, they American command announced here early today.
SAIGON, Jan. 29 (AP)—Four United States Government in vestigators—not two—were in filtrated into the Saigon press corps to spy on the newsmen, official sources conceded today.
PARIS, Jan. 29—The United States affirmed today that it sends reconnaissance planes over North Vietnam with fighter escorts, but denied that this violated the 1968 understand ing that halted the bombing raids.
PARIS, Jan. 31 (UPI)—The chief adviser of the North Vietnamese delegation at the peace talks here returned to day from consultations in Hanoi and said that his Gov ernment was ready for seri ous negotiations. However, he said that Hanoi would make no concessions at the negotiating table under United States military pres sure. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 — While insisting that he was not partial to either side in the continuing conflict in the Mid dle East, President Nixon said this evening that he would decide within a month how many more weapons the United States would sell to Israel. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 30—The United States Mission said in a statement issued here today that four agents fraudu lently accredited as newsmen had been on a mission “com pletely unrelated to the local Vietnamese and foreign press corps or their activities.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Jan. 31 (AP)—Offi cers said today that reports yesterday of a major battle be tween United States soldiers and enemy battalions near Tay ninh had been made by a unit commander and that “we are not convinced” of the accuracy of the reports. 
CHICAGO, Jan. 30—The de fense in the Chicago conspiracy trial neared the end of its case today in a session marked by the appearance of several prominent witnesses. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 (UPI) —Lance Cpl. Erick W. Beattie of Staten Island, a marine, has been killed in action in Viet nam, the Pentagon announced today. 
Following is a transcript of Presi dent Nixon's news conference in Washington yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:
Jan. 20, 1970
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 30 — The United States com mand acknowledged today that there had been periodic air‐to ground engagements in North Vietnam since the bombing halt 15 months ago that had not been made public because they were considered to be “insig nificant.” 
HONG KONG, Feb. 28 (Reuters)—The North Vietnam ese have signed an agreement with the Russians increasing their exchange of goods by 30 per cent this year, the North Vietnamese press agency said today. North Vietnam will ex port ready‐made clothes and other consumer goods in ex change for fuel, textiles and other comomdities, the report said.
MIAMI BEACH, Feb. 28 — Mayor Lindsay sharply criticized tonight the Administration's policy in the Middle East, warn ing that to assume the role of a “benevolent neutral” would be tantamount to an “abdica— tion of our moral responsi bility.”
CAMP PENDLETON; Calif. Feb. 28 (AP)—Cpl. Robert Dalton a young‐Canailian Who says he Joined the United States Marine Corps “just for laughs,” is going home a hero, the holder of the Nayy Cross.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 28 (UPI)—Cambodia re leased today the five United States Navy men who “were captured Feb. 5 when an American gunboat sailed up the Mekong. River into Cam bodian territory, apparently by mistake.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 28 (AP) — The United States Command reported to day that three Army helicopters had been lost to enemy gunners in a single clav's action.
VIENTIANE, Laos — Last September the Government forces in this divided country scored an unexpected and spec tacular military success They drove the North Vietnamese in vaders and their feeble local client, the Pathet Lao, from the Plaine des Jarres, a strategic re gion in the mountainous north that lad‐beetrtheld by the Com inunists since 1964.
IN VIETNAM: THE FRONT VS. THE REAR
The Saigon Government has taken a tardy first step toward reversing a dangerously arbitrary action with its decision to order a new trial for a neutralist legis lator summarily convicted by a military court last week on charges of pro‐Communist activity and then roughly seized in his sanctuary in the National Assem bly. But it remains highly doubtful whether opposition leader Tran Ngoc Chau should ever have been brought to trial in the first‐place.
Cyrus S. Eaton, the Cleveland industrialist, said yesterday that he was confident the North Vietnamese would soon release a list of United States prison ers and would allow the cap tives to write their families.
Communication Policy
CHICAGO, Feb. 28—The seven defendants in the Chicago con spiracy trial were released from jail,today in a‘total of $155,000 bondAbout five hours after the United States Court of Appeals For the Seventh Circuit granted hero half the severimenwalked put of Chicago Federal Build Mg into a shonting crowd of supporters and newsmen.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Feb. 22—Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the Chief of State and absolute ruler of Cambodia, has told vis itors that if his country ever had become Communist it should be the Chinese who do the job, not the Vietnamese.
LITCHFIELD, Conn., Feb. 28—St. Michael's Episcopal Church was the setting here today for the marriage of Miss Sarah Ashton Nuese, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Edwin Nuese, to Lieut. Landon Ketchum Thorne 3d, U.S.M.C.R., a Vietnam veteran, who is sta tioned at Parris Island, S. C. He is the son of Mr. Thorne Jr. of New York and Boca Grande, Fla., and Mrs. Alice Barry Thorne of Rome.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 28 (AP) — The United States Marines disclosed to day the names of five men charged with the murder of 16 Vietnamese women and children at Sonthang village Feb. 19. The five, all mem bers of a combat patrol, are: Lance Cpl. Randell D. Herrod, 20 years old, of Calvin, Okla.; Pfc. Thomas R. Boyd, 19, of Evansville, Ind.; Pfc. Michael S. Krichten, 19, of Hanover, Pa.; Pfc. Samuel G. Green, 18, of Cleveland and Pvt. Michael A. Schwarz, 21, of Weirton, W. Va. Of the five, only private Schwarz is married. All of the men havepeen decorated and three of them—Corporal Herrod and Privates Boyd and Krichten—hold the Pur ple Heart.
SAIGON — The scene alter nated between comedy and tra gedy. There was the defiant op position legislator, Tran Ngoc Chau, spraying himself with de oderant and polishing his shoes with a dirty sock; while outside his refuge in the National As sembly, the police maneuvered into position for a raid that would end his four‐day sit‐in and send him to prison for the start of a 20‐year sentence at hard labor.
ISLA VISTA, Calif., Feb. 28 —As highway policemen pa trolled this small college town today, the University of Cali fornia campus community here searched for the Iroots of the recent violence that resulted in more than 100 arrests and in juries and the destruction of several buildings, including a bank.
WASHINGTON—Fifteen years ago Graham Greene's English correspondent in “The Quiet American” strolled down Rue Catinat toward the Saigon wa terfront and observed, “I could see lamps burning where they had disembarked the new Amer ican planes.” 
LANDING ZONE BALDY, South Vietnam, Feb. 28—Amer ican officers at this base south of Danang, assigned to deal with the case against five young marines facing murder charges in the deaths of 16 South Vietnamese civilians nine days ago, appear to be taking pains to avoid the con trovorsy that surrounds the alleged massacre at Songmy..
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 1 (Reuters)— The Laotian Gov ernment has sent a letter to Britain and the Soviet Union protesting North Vietnamese military activity in Laos, Bri tish diplomatic sources said to day..
President's Policy.
CAMBRIDGE, Mass., March 1 —The New England Antiwar Conference concluded a week end of deliberations at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech nology today after deciding to sponsor a mass nonviolent dem onstration in Boston on April 15 against the Vietnam war. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 2 (Reuters)— The chairman of a South Viet namese military tribunal today rejected a defense lawyer's re quest to call the United States Ambassador, Ellsworth Bunker, to testify for the defense of Tran Ngoc Chau..
Two patrolmen, one of whom a former Army heli copter pilot who had ‘been shot down twice in Vietnam, were killed yesterday when their Police Department heli copter crashed in the drive way of a Glen Oaks, Queens, home while on a routine traffic patrol.
WASHINGTON, March 1—A task force in the State Depart ment has just begun work on confidential project to deter mine a new approach for eco nomic aid to Southeast Asia after the Vietnam war..
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 1 (AP)—With enemy activity in South Vietnam lim ited at present to terrorist and rocket and mortar attacks, United States B‐52 bombers were diverted again today to attacks on North Vietnamese supply depots along the Ho Chi Minh trail in eastern Laos, re liable sources said..
SANTA BARBARA, Calif., March 2 (AP)—The last National Guardsmen were withdrawn to day from the, community adja cent to the University of Cali fornia campus here, leaving local officers to deal with youths who last week fought policemen with rocks and bottles and burned a Bank of America to the ground. 
CHAMPAIGN, Ill.,.March 2— Students and the police clashed on and around the, campus of the University of Illinois to night following an antiwar demonstration earlier against a General Electric Company recruiter. 
WASHINGTON, March 2 (UPI) —The Pentagon today identi fied the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 2 (AP)—Twenty Ameri can B‐52 bombers rained tons of explosives today on the Seven Mountains region about eight miles from Cambodia in the Mekong Delta, where North Vietnamese troops are reported to have been en trenched for months. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, March 3—Two South Vietnamese deputies began a 48‐hour hunger strike in the lobby of the National Assembly building this morning to pro test the trial of Deputy Tran Ngoc Chau and what they termed other violations of the Constitution by President Ngu yen Van Thieu. 
CHICAGO, March 2 (AP)— Ten Federal judges filed peti tions today asking the United States Court of Appeals for the seventh circuit for guidelines on contempt citations in connec tion with the Chicago riot trial.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 2 (AP)—United States officials disclosed a new method today for measuring pacifica tion of villages in South Viet nam. 
TUCSON, Ariz., March 2— In Cleveland, it seems, the hottest issue under debate is not civil rights and it's not the Vietnam war. It's Ken Harrelson's hair. 
Cyrus R. Vance, former Unit ed States negotiator at the Paris talks, said last night that Presi dent Nixon's program of Viet namization made a settlement of the war in Vietnam too de pendent on what the enemy does.
WASHINGTON, March 3— Top United States military ad visers in Vietnam repeatedly declined to estimate at a public hearing in the Senate today how soon the South Vietnamese forces could take over the com bat responsibilities from the American troops. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 3 (AP)—Military sources reported today that during the last 24 hours allied forces killed 186 North Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers in fighting ranging from the Mekong Delta to the central coast. 
CINCINNATI, March 3 (AP) —William M. Kunstler, an at torney for the Chicago 7, told a cheering crowd of 1,300 at the University of Cincinnati to day to “resist illegitimate au thoriey, let your voice be heard and don't stop until things changed.” 
CHAMPAIGN, Ill., March 3— Several hundred National Guard troops were ordered onto the campus of the University of Illinois tonight to disperse crowd of 5,000 students and to enforce a 10:30 P.M. curfew.
ALBANY, March 3—Final leg islative approval was voted to day on a bill to assure that communications between certi fied public accountants and their clients would not be divulged. 
WASHINGTON, March 3— For almost a decade, the offi cial though private judgment here has been that the defense o Laos, the Asian kingdom of two and a half million people, is not in itself a vital interest of the United States 
SAIGON, South Vietnarq, March 4 — Business has not been quite so good for Mrs, Aimee Galaup, who owns the Lyne Flower Shop here, since” the French pulled out of Viet nam. That was 16 years ago.
OKLAHOMA CITY, March 4 (AP) — The House passed a resolution today commending Chicago Mayor, Richard J. Daley and United States District Judge Julius J. Hoffman for their conduct during the Demo cratic convention riots and the trial of the Chicago seven.
OAKLAND, Calif., March 4 (UPI)—A time bomb was dis covered today in a barracks at the Oakland Army Base, a major shipping point for troops going to Vietnam.

ALBANY, March 4 (UPI)— The acting president of the State University at Albany said today that. his administration would make no attempt to ban a speech by the Chicago Seven defense attorney, William M. Kunstler, on campus tomorrow night. Dr. Allan Kuusisto said he hoped there would be no violence when Mr. Kunstler addressed the student body in the campus gymnasium.
WASHINGTON, March 4— American civilian pilots are illegally flying about $400,000 weekly in checks and cash out of Saigon to black market money changers in Bangkok, Thailand, according to Senator Abraham A. Ribicoff, Democrat of Connecticut.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 5 (AP)— American fighter‐bombers at tacked enemy gun positions in Cambodia two days ago after a South Vietnamese district town along the border was struck by mortars, the Unitec States command reported today
CHAMPAIGN, Ill., March 4—About 450 National Guard troops were called to the University of Illinois campus tonight for the second night in a row to enforce a curfew as student demonstrations continued.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 5 (AP) — A military court today convicted the National Assemblyman Tran Ngoc Chau for the second time of pro‐Communist activity, but reduced the 20‐year sentence gave him last week to 10 years.
WASHINGTON, March 4 (UPI) — The Defense Depart ment announced today that Specialist 4 Victor Del Greco Jr., of Manchester, Conn., of the Army had been killed in action in Vietnam.
PARIS, March 5—The United States again pressed the Com munist delegations at the Viet nam peace conference today to give details on American pris oners. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March —With about three months of dry weather ahead, the North Vietnamese were holding‐ the same ground in Laos today that they; occupied last year at the end of their annual dry season offensive. This puts the Communist forces in a strong position. 
Support for Judiciary
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 5 — The conviction of Tran Ngoc Chau today on charges of pro‐Communist ac tivities is the culmination of what independent observers here agree has been the most naked display of presidential power by Nguyen Van Thieu since his election in 1967. The 
David Dellinger, one of the defendants in the Chicago Sev en conspiracy trial, said yester day that the defendants had tried to present’ a “rational, lu cid explanation” of their case.
WASHINGTON, March 5 Senator Edmund S. Muskie charged today that the Nixon Administration',s Vietnam poli cies “cannot bring peace.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 5 (AP) — American bat tle deaths rose past 100 last week for the first time this year, despite relatively light enemy activity, the United States command reported today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 5—Tran Ngoc Chau, National Assembly member who was sentenced to 10 years at hard labor today on charges of having been in contact with the Communists, said later that he would resume his service to his country “after peace has been restored.” 
WASHINGTON, March 5 (UPI) —The. Pentagon today identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
QUESON, South Vietnam, March 3—The dust of the dry season is beginning to blow in the faces of the United States marines in this desolate valley again as the northern monsoon clouds lift and the sun heals the mud ruts in the 10‐mile road that threads from the paved coastal highway to this district capital.
CHAMPAIGN, III., March 6 (UPI)—Gov. Richard B. Ogilvie today recalled the 750 National Guardsmen he had ordered to the University of lipnois cam pus to control violent student demonsteations.
LOUISVILLE, Ky., March 6 —Judge James F. Gordon of the United States District Court issued a temporary injunction today prohibiting Meade County officials from prosecuting six supporters of an antiwar cof feehouse in Muldraugh, Ky., on indictments returned Feb. 16.
An antiwar organization an nounced yesterday it had re ceived a cable from the Gov ernment of North Vietnam con firming that 14 American serv icemen were being held as prisoners of war.
SYRACUSE, March 6—“You made a lot of friends in your last speech last fall, a local Republicazi official in Rome, N. Y., toldSenator Charles E. Goodell this morning but then you went back to Waqhingtonl and lost them all.
NEW BRUNSWICK, N. J., March 6—A speech at Rutgers University by Jerry Rubin, one of the defendants in the Chi cago Seven conspiracy trial, was interrupted by a bomb scare tonight.

WASHINGTON, March 6— The ghosts of bitter memory in Vietnam haunt P:esident Nixon's first formal report to the nation on Laos today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 6 — A top official in the South Vietnamese Government sought today to divert criticism of the conviction of Deputy Tran Ngoc Chau to the United States Embassy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 6 (AP)—Sharp fighting raged in a jungle near the Cambodian border today be tween a company of American riflemen and a North Vietna mese force believed to be guarding enemy supplies, the United States command said.
WASHINGTON, March 6 (UPI)—The Defense Depart ment announced today the names of 10 men killed in the Vietnam war. Among them was George T. Olsen of Brooklyn, a Specialist 4 of the Army.
ALBANY, March 7—“Offi cials at the university are cau tiously optimistic that trouble can he avorted!”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 7 (UPI)—The South Vietnamese Senate has passed major land reform legislation sought by President Nguyen Van Thieu to permit the Gov ernment to give free land to soldiers and war widows. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 7 (AP) — United States troops operating in jungle neat the Cambodian border clashed today for the second day in. row with North Vietnamese troops believed to be protecting caches of rice and arms, allied spokesman said. 
CHICAGO, March 7 (UPI)— William M. Kunstler and Leon ard Weinglass, attorneys for the Chicago 7 in their recent con spiracy trial, posted bond today on the contempt sentences im posed on them by United States District Judge Julius J. Hoff man after the trial. 
ONE evening late in December was invited along with 20 other white suburbanites to to meet and question two Black Panther leaders in a plush, 14‐room, Westchester home, set on three‐and a‐half wooded acres. The confronta tion was filmed for three hours by the news department of a major net work. The producer and his stars ar rived, appropriately, 20 minutes late and were then seated on a very nice soft, blue couch facing a semicircle of whites. The living room was large and furnished in a style best described as “indifferent Colonial.”
WASHINGTON — The North Vietnamese and their Pathet Lao allies produced the first impor tant indication last week that their offensive in Laos is intend ed to force the United States into political concessions there— and perhaps in Vietnam. From Hanoi, the Pathet Lao informa tion bureau issued a five‐point statement Friday demanding, in essence, that the United States withdraw from Laos completely and that a new coalition govern ment be established under Pathet Lao domination.
WASHINGTON, March 7 (UPI) —United States sol dders In Vietnam are sending a “veritable flood” of illegal automatic weapons and ex plosives through the mails into this country, according to Customs Commissioner Miles J. Ambrose. 
New Foreign Policy
WASHINGTON, March 7 (Reu ters)—The Defense Department said in a statement today that not one of 27 United States prisoners of war named by North Vietnam this week was new to its list of known pris oners. 
The Soviet warning that Hanoi will shortly break off the Paris peace talks if the United States continues to downgrade them must be taken seriously, despite the refusal of North Vietnamese and Vietcong repre sentatives to confirm that they have such plans. The Soviet Ambassador to France, Valerian Zorin, is too old a diplomatic hand to have made such a prediction without instructions.
A Federal appellate court judge warned yesterday that obstreperous and disorderly conduct by defendants in court was threatening to become a “major epidemic.”
SAN FRANCISCO, March 7 (UPI) The Bank of America will reopen its burned out branch office near the University of California at Santa. Barbara next Monday, A. W. Clausen, president of the bank, an nounced Thursday.
HONG KONG, March 7—The political arm of the pro‐Commu nist Pathet Lao movement in Laos has issued a program for peace there similar to the Viet cong plan for South Vietnam. 
Addiction Services
WASHINGTON, March 8— The First Secretary of North Vietnam's Communist party has called for a purge of leaders and other elements “detested by the masses” and the. simultaneous admission of “young members” to strengthen the party.
MUONG PHALANE, Laos, March 8—The western reach es of the Ho Chi Minh Trail are no more than 20 miles east of this command post of the 33d Volunteer Battalion of the Laotian Army, and Khesanh, the once‐embattled valley just south of the de militarized zone in Vietnam; is only about 60 miles from here, also on Route 9.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 9 (AP)—A United States helicopter gun ship accidentally fired 14 rock ets into a village on the out skirts of Saigon last night, kill ing three Vietnamese civilians and wounding 11, the United States command reported to day.
District Attorney Thomas J. Mackell of Queens announced his candidacy for the Demo cratic nomination for Gover nor yesterday and attacked Nelson A. Rockefeller's rule in the office over the last 12 years.
WASHINGTON, March 9 (UPI)—The Defense Depart ment said today that Specialist 4 Thomas Drum of Johnson City, N. Y., of the Army had been killed in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, March 9— The White House, confronted with Senate criticism that it was presenting a misleading picture of American involve ment in Laos, established this evening a new policy of an nouncing American casualties and aircraft losses in Laos sep arately from those in the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, March 9— Vice President Agnew said to day that the way to end de facto segregation in the United States was not by buSing schoolchildren but by opening up opportunities for better jobs and better housing for Negroes.
TANPHTU, South Vietnam, March 9 — “It was just an unfortunate accident of war,” said the padre, the Rev. Joseph Doan Phi Hung.
WASHINGTON, March 8 (AP) — The Pentagon an nounced today that an Army master sergeant had been charged with larceny, bribery and graft in connection with allegedly illicit operations of military clubs.
Mayor Lindsay said last night that “benign neglect, or any other neglect, when it comes to the urban crisis, will only spell the decline of our cities and our civilization.”
SAIGON, March 9 (Reuters) —The Government gave in to day to local press demands and lifted recently imposed heavy tax increases on some imported newsprint.
DANANG, South Vietnam, March 9—Five years and one day after their units waded ashore to become the first United States combat troops in Vietnam, the Marines today turned control of the I Corps area over to the United States Army.
Senator Jacob K. Davits was awarded the 1970 Free dom Award of the Interna tional Rescue Committee last night for his assisting of “refugees fleeing from polit ical, racial and religions tyr anny and from War”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 9 — Although enemy forces in South Vietnam appear to be engaged in a major ef fort to resupply, the pace of their attacks has slowed drastically in the last few months in sharp contrast to the pat tern in previous‐years, accord ing to allied officials.
WASHINGTON, March 9— The New Mobilization Commit tee to end the War in Vietnam announced plans today for demonstrations at draft boards in more than 100 cities, includ ing New York, on March 19.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, March 10—A spokes man for the United States com mand here announced this morning that it had been in structed by the Pentagon to begin immediately reporting to the public American aircraft losses over Laos.
WASHINGTON, March 9 (UPI) The Army board looking into the handling of the initial in vestigation of the Mylai inci dent said today that it had con cluded its hearings. The panel heard 398 witnesses in its three‐month inquiry.
BUFFALO, March 10—More than 5,000 striking students at the state university here turned taut tonght to hear Jerry Rubin, one of the defendants in the Chicago seven conspiracy trial, attack “liberal compromise.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 10 (AP) — The United States command reported today that a Marine helicopter had crashed on take‐off and burned at Danang, killing five marines and injuring five others. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 10—Land reform legisla tion gained in South Vietnam this week after a six‐month pause. 
IN 1945, shortly after the end of World War II, an American general who ad mired the efficiency of the Vietnamese Communists ar ranged for a 33‐year‐old Lao tian highway engineer to be flown to Hanoi to meet Ho Chi Minh, the Communist leader. Ho in turn provided
WASHINGTON, March 10 (UPI)—The Defense Department today identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in action in Vietnam: 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Wednesday, March 11—Young Cambodians today sacked the North Vietnamese and Vietcong embassies here in an outburst of popular indignation against Communist infiltration into the country. 
WASHINGTON, March 10— Capt. Ernest L. Medina and four other soldiers were ac cused by the Army today of committing murder and other crimes in the Vietnamese vil lage of Songmy. 
PARIS, March 11 — Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the Cam bodian Chief of State, charged tonight that the sacking of the Vietcong and North Vietnamese embassies in his country re sulted from a plot “to throw our country into the arms of an imperialist capitalist power.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 12 (Reuters) —South Vietnamese authorities today seized copies of a Saigon newspaper that said democracy no longer existed in the coun try and that President Nguyen Van Thieu had lost the support of the people.
WASHINGTON, March 11— The Army has reportedly ac cused Capt. Erne‐st L. Medina of premeditated murder of a peasant woman and a child among four Vietnamese during the alleged massacre of civilians by soldiers in his company in The village of Songmy in 1968.
“You better believe that woke up and thought I'd passed over to the other young sol dier who had come on the ward only two hours before after the long flight from Vietnam. “There was Kitty Carlisle!” The singer was only one of dozens of celebrities and entertainers who visited the wards at the Naval Hos pital in St. Albans, Queens, last year. She also heads the committee at the American Red Cross in Greater New York, which recruits celeb rities to visit the wounded.
President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam silenced another political foe last week under condi tions that reflect discredit not only on the Saigon regime but also on the United States. Deputy Tran Ngoc Chau was sentenced to ten years of hard labor by a military court acting with questionable legality on charges that were of even more doubtful validity.
WASHINGTON, March 11 (Reuters) ‐ Defense Secretary Melvin R. Laird today forecast further cuts in military man power and spending to keep within what he called an aus tere budget.
LONGBINH, South Viet nam, March 11 (UP)—A nine member military court fined S. Sgt. Timothy Kephart $300 today and demoted him to the rank of corporal on charges of having imper sonated an officer so he could take his Vietnamese girl friend on a Hong Kong vacation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, March 12 (AP) — Enemy troops attacked a Milted States Army unit yesterday near Quangngai City and rid dled three helicopters trying to carry out the wounded, the United States command said today. United States casualties were put at one killed and six wounded and enemy losses at two dead.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 11—He is 63 years old and there are many days when he feels he has become an old man.
WASHINGTON, March 12 (AP)—Twelve volunteers have been ousted from the Peace Corps during the last four months because of their public opposition to United States for eign policy, especially the Viet nam war. 
Mrs. Afeni Skakur, the only one of the “Panther 13” defend ants charged with conspiracy to blow up department stores and police stations who is free on bail, told an audience at City College yesterday afternoon to “get a gun—get a bazooka— and do something with it.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, March 13 (AP) —United States and North Vietnamese troops fought today in the jun gles around Tayninh, near the Cambodian border north of Sai gon, the region where there were sharp engagements earlier this week. 
WASHINGTON, March 12 The State Department has shifted to a neutral position on a proposed congressional repeal of the 1964 Tonkin Gulf resolution. 
IBM, Mobile and GTE are enemies of all life. In 1969 IBM made $250 million, Mo bile $150 million and GTE $140 million for US “defense” contracts—profits made from the suffering and deaths of human beings. All three prof it not only from death in Vietnam but also from Amer ikan imperialism in all of the Third World. They profit from
PARIS, March 12 — Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that the Communists had a choice between respecting Cam bodia's neutrality or seeing pro‐American rightists take over his GoVernment. 
Many continue to argue that a military solution, or “vic tory,” in Vietnam has all along been within our reach, that nothing less would serve our interests. I believe such a solu tion is not now and never has been possible under conditions consistent with our interests.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 13 —Informed sources just arrived from neighboring Cambodia said today that the sacking of the North Vietnamese and Viet cong embassies in Pnompenh last Wednesday and the sub sequent riots were believed to have been instigated by the military with the object of ob liging Prince Sihanouk to show greater firmness against the Vietnamese Communists.
PARIS. March 13 (AP)—Prince Sihanouk broke off a vacation in Paris today to return home. He told newsmen before leav ing Paris by air, “I am going to Moscow and Peking to ask them to curb the activities of the Vietcong and Vietminh North Vietnames in my coun try.”
WASHINGTON, March 13 (AP) —Draft protesters an nounced plans today to block the main door of the national Selective Service headquarters Thursday with a coffin contain ing draft cards. They also plan to sit down around the build ing as part of antidraft week, March 16–21, called by the New Mobilization Committee to end the war in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, March 13 (UPI)—The Defense Department identified these United States Army men from the New York area yesterday as having been killed in Vietnam:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 13 (Reuters) —The United States military com mand today published a map of Laos that divided the kingdom into six regions. The command said the map would be used to provide general locations when air craft losses there were an nounced. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 13 (AP) — Reliable sources said today that United States soldiers of the Special Forces led South Vietnamese irregulars in a surprise attack on a Vietcong jungle hospital yesterday and seized it after battle.
VIENTIANE. Laos, March 13 (AP) — United States fighter bombers caught a North Viet namese helicopter on the ground near the Ho Chi Minh Trail and destroyed it, reliable informants said today. It was the first report of an enemy helicopter destroyed in Laos.
WASHINGTON, March 13 —The House Armed Services Committee has proposed loan of three United States submarines to Nationalist China. 
ROME, March 13 (AP) — Pope Paul VI received nine members of the South Viet namese Assembly today and told them peace must be their watchword. But he said peace must “respect the fundamental rights and the just aspirations of all.”
SALA PHOUKHOUN, Laos, March 13 — Dug in on half a dozen windy high points some 5,000 feet up here in the spec tacular rugged mountains, more than four well‐equipped Royal Laotian Army battalions await the next move of the North Vietnamese out of the east. They have orders, avows Col. Khamphet Phanvilay, command ing the 17th Battalion “to de fend to the last man.” 
BOSTON, March 14, (UPI)— The Massachusetts House has given preliminary approval to a bill that would prevent the state's citizens from fighting in undeclared wars such as Vietnam. 
MOSCOW, March 14—Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodian Chief of State, met with Pre mier Aleksei N. Kosygin and President Nikolai V. Podgorny today to discuss this week's anti‐Vietcong and anti‐North Vietnamese outbursts in his country. 
WASHINGTON, March 14 — The Democratic National Com mittee responded acidly today to President Nixon's “state of the world” report on his Ad ministration's approach to for eign policy. 
WASHINGTON—Senator Ed Muskie's hard‐hitting speech on Vietnam, in which he sharply criticized the Vietnamization policy, is being widely credited with making him the front runner among Democratic Presidential contenders. That is the narrowest and shakiest conclusion to be drawn from Mr. Muskie's speech. 
SAIGON—When Ho Chi Minh died last September, there was a consensus among Hanoi watchers that the rule of the 79‐year‐old patriarch of Vietna mese Communism would be a tough act to follow. Now, six months later, a self‐confident, assertive successor appears to be emerging in Le Duan, the 62‐year‐old first secretary of the North Vietnamese Commu nist party. 
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 12—Most days in Viet nam, Specialist 4 G. Avon Stot ler is just a foot soldier trudg ing through the jungle with the Fifth Infantry Division (Mech anized) near the demilitarized zone. 
Theodore C. Sorensen, one of the candidates for the Dem ocratic nomination for the United States Senate, main tains that economic issues have “the greatest political cutting edge” for New York State voters. 
FIRE BASE APOLLO, South Vietnam, March 7—The mem bers of the United States First Infantry Division here do not stop talking about time. Only 5 more weeks, only 17 more days left, men from Illinois and Alabama and Ohio tell each other. Then they will leave Vietnam and for them the war will finally, be over. 
LONDON, March 14—Accord ing to doctors in the areas of Vietnam controlled by the Na tional Liberation Front, children there are developing rickets be cause they spend so much of their life underground. 
PRINCETON, N. J., March 14 —The American people are now divided about equally in their views on the rate of troop withdrawal from Vietnam, ac cording to the Gallup Poll. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 14 (AP) — President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that the Pathet Lao proposal to end the fighting in Laos was the same as the Vietcong plan for ending the war in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, March 14—A group of 300 lawyers who mon itored the mass antiwar demon stration here last November portrayed the event as “over whelmingly peaceful” today and chided the Justice Depart ment for official statements that the lawyers said had “pre dicted—and tended to incite— violence.” 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 14 (UPI) — Military sources said today that a suspected North Vietnamese helicopter de stroyed on the ground along the Ho Chi Minh Trail this week might actually have been a South Vietnamese helicopter shot down in the area two years ago. 
PARIS — The most unpopu lar phrase in the United States nowadays is “domino theory”— a metaphor describing what might happen if South Vietnam is overrun by Hanoi's Armies. Ever since the Eisenhower Presidency, when the phrase was first used, it has been em ployed to warn that if one Southeast Asian land is forcibly communized all the rest will follow. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, March 15 (AP)—A United States helicopter gun ship accidentally fired several rockets into a group of Ameri can soldiers yesterday morn ing, killing three and wounding 19, the United States command said today. 
The five‐point Communist peace proposal for Laos could move the conflict there from one of confronta tion to one of negotiation. A cease‐fire, though sug gested by both sides, is as unlikely in the immediate future as an early settlement; the Laotian war is too closely linked to that in Vietnam for one to be settled apart from the other. But a tacit downturn in the fighting should be possible. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 14 (AP)—The United States command, in a new crackdown on black market ac tivities, has ordered more than 30 civilian companies working under United States Govern ment contracts to dismiss im mediately all employes pun ished in the past for illegal currency manipulation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 14 (UPI) — The United States command indicated to day that plane losses over Laos had been included in figures of accidental aircraft losses in Vietnam. 
CHICAGO, March 14 (AP)— Petitions by 10 Federal judges to intervene in the appeal of contempt convictions issued in the Chicago conspiracy trial have been denied by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 14—Many South Viet namese who live adjacent to areas that are being defoliated by spray from United States planes are convinced that any ailments or misfortunes that they suffer are related to the sprayings.
Speedy demobilization after a war is an old Ameri can tradition. Vietnam has initiated a new phenome non: demobilization before a war is over. To defuse antiwar sentiment, the Administration has been trim ming military manpower and defense spending and even hinting at elimination of the draft. But it has still not succeeded in heading off a coordinated drive in Congress to cut the new $71.8 billion defense budget further, particularly the non‐Vietnam expendi tures that make up more than 80 per cent of the total.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 15 (Agence France‐Presse)—The United States began arming Laotian Government forces with M‐16 rifles about 10 months ago, only a few weeks after the start of its wholesale issue of the weapons to South Vietna mese forces at the birth of “Vietnamization.”
SACRAMENTO, Calif., March 15 (AP) — Veterans of World War II and Vietnam dropped what they said were their serv ice medals into a flag‐draped, makeshift coffin on the Cali fornia Capitol steps today in a protest against war. Thirty‐six men stepped before 200 people on the steps to either turn back medals or identify themselves as veterans against war.
HONG KONG, March 15 — Representatives of North Viet nam the Vietcong and Cam bodia have agreed to meet tomorrow in Pnompenh to dis cuss Cambodia's protests over the presence of Communist troops on her territory.
PITTSBURGH, March 15— The Army will shut down the Hays Ordnance Works here June 1 and lay off all 1,200 em ployes. The plant is one of three in the nation that manu factures 105‐mm shells for use in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, March 15— The Defense Department an nounced today that a Thailand bound American freighter on military charter with a cargo of munitions had been diverted to Cambodian waters, and offi cials disclosed messages saying that “men with guns” had taken over the ship.
WASHINGTON, March 15 (Reuters) — Senator Thomas J. Dodd announced today the opening of an investigation into a possible connection between the alleged Mylai massacre and the use of drugs by Ameri can soldiers in South Vietnam. The Connecticut Democrat said testimony would begin before his juvenile delinquency sub committee March 24. There has been no public mention by the Government of drug use by the soldiers who have been impli cated in the alleged massacre In March 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 15 (UPI) — Military spokesmen said that United States artillery was fired at North Vietnamese troops spot ted in the demilitarized zone today in the first significant incident in the zone in more than two months.
WASHINGTON, March 15— Senator Stuart Symington sug gested today that the Philippine Government had misused funds provided by the United States to help support the Philippine military detachment in South Vietnam.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Monday, March 16 (AP) — A four‐engine United States Navy electronic reconnaissance plane crashed and exploded as it was landing at the air base here to day.
SAIGON, March 16 (UPI)— The United States command an nounced today the loss of three American planes in operations over Laos that included ground support for Laotian troops and B‐52 raids against the Ho Chi Minh Trail. 
HONG KONG, March 16— Communist China said today that Premier Chou En‐lai had “expressed uneasiness and re gret” over the Cambodian Clem onstrations against the Northl Vietnamese and Vietcong mis sions in Pnompenh. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 16 (AP)—The National Assembly today passed and sent to President Nguyen Van Thieu a land‐reform bill de signed to make every peas ant owner of the land he farms. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 16 (AP)—Sporadic fight ing was reported today near Tayninh, and the United States command said that 28 enemy soldiers were killed in two days of combat in the area, near Nuibaden, or the Black Virgin Mountain. 
WASHINGTON, March 16 — The United States made anoth er small gesture toward better relations with Communist China today by removing most of the barriers against Ameri can travel to China.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 16—Cambodia opened talks with the Vietcong and North Vietnamese today on the presence of their troops in this neutral country.
LONG BEACH, Calif., March 16—Mrs. Alvin L. Glatkowski, the wife of one of the” men identified as having requested asylum in Cambodia, said here that her husband had frequent ly expressed disapproval of the war in Vietnam, but “was not the type to march in peace parades or anything like that” 
WASHINGTON, March 16 (UPI)—The Defense Department today listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
BOSTON, March 16 (AP)— The Massachusetts House passed today, 136 to 89, a bill to forbid Massachusetts resi dents to serve in a war zone without a Congressional dec laration of war.
A young West Point graduate, now a first lieutenant in the Army, has asked to be dis charged from the armed forces as a conscientious objector be cause “there exists no doubt in my mind that the Vietnam war is immoral and unjust.”The 23‐year‐old lieutenant, Louis P. Font of Kansas City, Kan., who placed 31st in the 1968 graduating class of 706 cadets at the United States Mili tary Academy, based his appli cation in part on the West Point Cadets' Prayer, which he cited as embracing “the ideals on which I base my claim.”
DETROIT, March 17—Offi cials of the Dow Chemical Company said today that birth abnormalities found in test ani mals could be caused by ma terials used as defoliants in Vietnam. 
CHAUDOC, South Vietnam, March 17 — Cambodian troops tried to drive a Vietcong battal ion back across the border into South Vietnam yesterday and Sunday and called in South Vietnamese artillery fire to help, highly reliable informants reported today. 
WASHINGTON, March 17— The International Boundary Commission, an American‐ Ca nadian agency that maintains the border between the United States and Canada, will not clear land this year with chemical defoliant used in Viet nam, a spokesman for the com mission said today. The com mission has been using the de foliant since 1966. 
WEST POINT, N. Y., March 17—At 30 minutes past noon today, Samuel W. Koster, an Iowa‐born major general, stood on the stone balcony in the United States Military Acad emy mess hall and, facing the flags of the United States and the 50 states, told his cadets that he had requested assign ment elsewhere to save them from the publicity of his in volvement with the alleged massacre at Songmy. 
WASHINGTON, March 17— When the Army ap pointed Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers last November to head the panel looking into the Songmy incident, Penta gon associates disclosed that he was not particularly hap py, and may even have “growled a little bit” about the assignment. 
WASHINGTON, March 17 (UPI)—The Defense Depart ment today listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
WASHINGTON, March 17— The two young gunmen who seized an American munitions freighter in the Gulf of Siam last Saturday were reported to day to have warned the ship's captain that “this was the first in a series of such mutinies” designed to “impede the war effort in Vietnam.”
Nations to Boycott
MAJ. GEN. SAMUEL W. KOSTER—Born in West Lib erty, Iowa, on Dec. 29, 1919. . . . Graduated from high school in West Liberty and West Point. class of 1942.... Rose to regimental executive officer in Europe during World War II. . . . Served as tactical officer at West Point in 1949. . . In Korea, he di rected Eighth Army's guer rilla warfare effort against North Korea. . . . In late '50's he served as deputy secretary and later as Secretary of Staff at Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers in Paris.. . In 1966 he was assigned as director of the Plans and Pro grams Division in the office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Force Development at the Pentagon. . . . In 1967 he as sumed command of the Ameri cal Division in Vietnam. . . . His wife is Cherie K. Koster of Iowa City, Iowa. . . . They have five children.... He has been superintendent of West Point since June, 1968.. . . Holds the Silver Star, the Le gion of Merit and the Bronze Star Medal.
Maj. Gen. Samuel W. Koster, charged with dereliction of duty yesterday in connection with the alleged Songmy mas sacre two years ago, may be the highest ranking general of ficer to be so charged in mod ern American military history. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 17 (Reuters)—North Vietnam ese and Vietcong representa tives at a meeting with Cam bodia are not heeding a de mand that they evacuate their troops from the country, usu all reliable sources said today. 
WILMINGTON, Del., March 17—The threat of disruptive tactics by a group of young militants at the annual meet ing of Hercules, Inc., failed to materialize here today. Instead, about 60 of the youths, who identified themselves as the Wilmington Action Committee, staged a rally in Rodney Square around the corner from Her cules company headquarters in the downtown area, about sev en and a half miles from the Hercules Research Center, the actual site of the stockholder meeting. 
SAN FRANCISCO, March 17 —A. W. Clausen, president of the Bank of America, defended the bank today against charges that it is a “capitalist” or ganization profiting from the war in Vietnam. 
Lieut. Louis P. Font, a Westl Point graduate in an Army green uniform, stared solemnly ahead of him yesterday at a news conference and explained in a quiet voice why he was asking the Army to discharge him as a selective conscien tious objector to the war in Vietnam. 
MINEOLA, L. I., March 17— The right of a person to fly the American flag upside down as a signal of distress for the country was upheld today by a judge in First District Court here.
WASHINGTON, March 17— The State Department said to day that the United States had not offered military assistance to the Cambodian Government in its effort to force North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops out of Cambodia. 
Rennie Davis, convicted of Federal riot‐incitement char?? of the “Chicago 7,” told 500 students at Columbia Univer sity yesterday that if the nine teen‐sixties were a time of sit ins, the nineteen‐seventies would be a time to “burn banks.” 
WASHINGTON, March 17 — The Army today accused 14 of ficers, including the superin endent of the United States Military Academy, of involve ment in suppression of infor mation about the alleged mass killing of civilians two years ago at Songmy, South Viet nam.
WASHINGTON, March 17— North Vietnam is slowly in creasing the flow of informa tion from American prisoners to their families in the United States. 
Following are the major events leading up to yester day's action by the Army in connection with the alleged massacre at Songmy:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 18 — President Nguyen Van Thieu said tonight that he would be willing to estab lish diplomatic relations with a “more amenable Cambodia” in the wake of the overthrow of Prince Norodom Sihanouk. 
TWASHINGTON, March 18— “He is a block, he is a rock, massive, weighty,” be gins a Cambodian magazine article about Lieut. Gen. Lon Nol. The article goes on to say that the General, who emerged in Pnompenh today as the apparent new ruler of Cambodia, replacing Prince Norodom Sihanouk, “speaks little, in a bass voice and with a minimum of gestures.” General Lon Nol, who is 56 years old, has been a magistrate, a civil administrator, a policeman and a soldier. He is known in Cambodia for his campaigns against North Vietnamese guerrillas prior to the Geneva Conference of 1954, which brought an end to French co lonial rule in Indochina after the fall of Dienbienphu to Ho Chi Minh's Vietminh forces.
MONTICELLO, Ill., March 18 (UPI)—University of Illinois trustees voted, 6 to 2, today to revoke their ban against an ap pearance on the Champaign campus by William M. Kunstler, defense attorney for the “Chi cago Seven.” The board, in a hastily called meeting two, weeks ago, ordered the univer city to “defer” a scheduled speech by Kunstler because of the probability if would ac celerate ?? 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 18 (AP)—A Government spokesman today denied re ports published yesterday that South Vietnamese artillery went to support Cambodian troops trying to drive Vietcong forces into South Vietnam Sun ?? and Monday. 
WASHINGTON, March 18— The Pentagon investigation into the alleged mass killing of South Vietnamese civilians at Songmy has indicated an ap parent failure of two separate Army command channels to provide any word of the inci dent, highly placed sources said today. 
PARIS, March 18 (AP)—The wives of two United States Navy airmen missing over North Vietnam staged a brief sitdown strike today in the building of Hanoi's diplomatic mission here in an unsuccessful effort to learn the fate of their husbands. 
WASHINGTON, March 18 (UPI)—The Defense Department today identified the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in action in Vietnam: 
WASHINGTON, March 18 — The United States Government appears to have been surprised by the overthrow of Prince Norodom Sihanouk. It is not yet prepared to write him off as force In Cambodian politics, and has not yet decided how the reported coup d'état may relate to other fast‐moving de velopments in Indochina. With the continuing threat of a North Vietnamese military advance across Laos, there is great concern about any further expansion of the Vietnam war in Cambodian territory.
Army personnel at installa tions from coast to coast re acted in varying degrees from shock to pride yesterday at the latest round of charges filed in connection with the alleged mass killing of civilians in 1968 at Songmy. South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, March 18 (AP)—About 400 women, wear ing gags, marched in a cold rain outside the White House fence today to protest war and the draft. Some carried signs saying, “Women will not be gagged—we demand out of Vietnam and Pathet Laos.” Most of the demonstrators were from New York and Philadel phia. They were members of Women Strike for Peace.
The United States Army has faced up to the horror of Mylai with remarkable vigor and candor in the report of a panel of inquiry headed by Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 18 —A limited withdrawal of civil ians and soldiers from army headquarters at Long Tieng be gan today after the United States‐supported base nearby at Sam Thong fell to 2,000 North Vietnamese troops. 
ALBANY, March 18—Final legislative approval was voted today on a bill that would per mit physicians to treat persons under the age of 21 for vene real disease without obtaining the consent of parents or guar dians. The present law requires such consent. 
Morris B. Abram entered the United States Senate race in New York yesterday with a pledge to “dare to dream and plan” for a better America. 
LONDON—Willy Brandt is unlikely to make any percepti ble advance toward German re unification at the Erfurt meet ing with his Eastern opposite, Willi Stoph, yet he might un wittingly touch off another de velopment of major historical portent: the overthrow of the Kremlin's Brezhnev‐Kosygin leadership. 
MANILA, March 19—Mili tary officials here, rebutting a statement by Senator Stuart Symington, told a Philippine Senate committee today that the Philippine contingent to Vietnam had never received any cash assistance from the United States. 
WASHINGTON, March 19 — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that he would urge President Nixon to con tinue heavy American bombing of infiltration routes in eastern Laos even if a Communist regime took over that nation and demanded an end to such activity. 
Most of the distribution of magazines, trade journals and books in the metropolitan area was halted by the postal strike. 
COLUMBIA, S. C., March 19 —Representative L. Mendel Rivers of South Carolina at tacked the Pentagon's handling of the alleged Songmy mas sacre today as “one of the darkest ages in the history of the Army.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, March 20 (AP)—The United States command an nounced yesterday that 101 Americans had been killed and 620 wounded in Vietnam war action last week. 
WASHINGTON, March 19— Young people demonstrated, against the draft today in most major cities.
In an act of mass civil dis obedience, 182 persons were arrested yesterday morning while trying to block the en trance to the office of four lo cal draft boards in lower Man hattan. There was no violence.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 19 —The American‐supported base at Sam Thong was reported to be in Government hands to day despite reports yesterday that the Pathet Lao rebels and North Vietnamese troops had taken the town. 
WASHINGTON, March 19— The United States said today that its recognition of Cam bodia continued unaffected by the overthrow of Prince Noro dom Sihanouk as Chief of State. 
ANPHU, South Vietnam, March 20—An American spotter plane and South Vietnamese ar tillery were called in by a Cam bodian Army commander today during a two‐hour battle against Vietcong troops inside Cam bodia. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 20 —Well‐informed sources said today that two Thai battalions had been flown to Long Tieng in United States planes to help defend that army base from an expected North Vietnamese attack. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 20 (UPI)—A United States Air Force F‐100 jet fighter‐bomber crashed in the Lower Panhandle of Laos yes terday, United States head quarters reported today. Spokesmen said the pilot and co‐pilot were rescued. The cause of the crash was not reported. 
SAIGON, March 20 (Reuters) —United States spokesman re ported that North Vietnamese troops today laid seige for sev en hours to an American artil lery base, killing 10 United States soldiers and wounding 31. 
WASHINGTON, March 20— The Defense Department an nounced today the names of 18 men killed in action in Viet nam. Among them was William T. Vohringer of Miliville, N. J., an Army staff sergeant. 
CAOLANH, South Vietnam, March 14 — It is a smaller, quieter war now, but the wreckage can be seen even in a small, bare room here where seven Vietnamese women sit, brushing the flies away from their faces and bare feet. 
Elizabeth Hubner, the Long Island housewife who flew her American flag upside down over her own home as a protest against the Vietnam war, is not going to jail for a year after all. Exercising far more common sense than a judge in Nassau County last November who caused her to be led away in hand cuffs like an ordinary criminal before her husband could raise bail, Judge Henderson W. Morrison threw the case out of court and let Mrs. Hubner go home. 
March 20, 1970
Four former servicemen said here yesterday that there was widespread use of narcotics by servicemen in Vietnam and Korea, and in military hospitals and bases in the United States. 
WASHINGTON, March 21— Conscientious objectors within the military—once so rare that they were not officially recog nized—are growing in number each year. 
WASHINGTON, March 21—Following is the official White House transcript of President Nixon's remarks at a news conference today:
Israel will not receive additional Phantom jets, President Nixon hinted at an impromtu news conference yesterday, but the decision —to be announced formally on Monday by Secretary of State William P. Rogers—may be reversed at any time if the Soviet Union's arms shipments to the Arab countries upsets the military balance in the Middle East. On another subject, Mr. Nixon said the increase in military activity in Laos would not affect American troop withdrawals from Vietnam. [Page 1, Column 1.] 
WASHINGTON, March 21— President Nixon hinted strongly today that the United States would not accede now to Is rael's request for more jet aircraft. But he said that this decision could easily be re versed if Soviet arms shipments to Arab nations upset the mili tary balance of power in the Middle East. 
WASHINGTON — Some of the mystery over the Army's failure to reveal information about the alleged Songmy massacre for a year and a half was removed last week when the Army filed charges against 14 officers for suppressing information concern ing the incident. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 21—Cheng Heng, the of ficial chosen by Cambodia's coup leaders to replace Prince Norodom Sihanouk as Chief of State, took the oath of office today. He reaffirmed the coun try's neutrality but also pledged to drive out the Communist troops who have used this country as a sanctuary in the war against South Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 21 (Reuters)—Saigon students today decided to boy cott classes for three days and to stage hunger strikes and demonstrations unless the Gov ernment released Huynh Tan Mam, a student leader accused of being a Vietcong agent. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, March 22 (UPI)—A 155‐mm artillery round deto nated prematurely in a firing position manned by United States marines, wounding 26 of them, the United States command said today. 
WASHINGTON, March 21— President Nixon said today that if the postal strike continued, “On Monday I will meet my constitutional obligation to see to it that the mails will go through.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 21 (AP)—The South Vietnamese police reported today that they had smashed a Communist spy cell in Sai gon and seized 14 of its members. But they said they still sought two Chinese trained spies, one of them a North Vietnamese major. 
WASHINGTON March 21 (AP) —Lieut. Gen. William J. McCaf frey, director of the Army's Civil Disturbance Planning and Operations Office since last August, has been named deputy commanding general of the Army in South Vietnam. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 21 —North Vietnamese and Lao tian forces clashed in increas ing but still small‐scale activity today near the United States supported base at Long Tieng âs both continued to reinforce their units in a contest for con trol of the area, 70 miles north east of here. 
SAIGON, March 21 (AP)— Maj. Gen. Albert E. Milloy, commander of the First Infan try Division, was named today to take over command of the Americal Division from Maj. Gen. Lloyd B. Ramsey, who suffered a broken left arm Tuesday in a helicopter crash. 
LONDON—U. S. policy obvi ously hopes to Europeanize the cold war in the West as soon as the process of Vietnamizing the hot war in the East is well under way. In each area Ameri can military power would serve as the ultimate guarantee against aggression but the main burden of initial defense is being shifted. 
Pretrial Detention
CAOLANH, South Vietnam, March 15 — The anxiety of United States military com manders over the widespread smoking of marijuana has led to thousands of bonfires in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON—While off in Moscow and Peking trying to get North Vietnamese troops thrown out of his country, Prince Noro dom Sihanouk finds himself thrown out of power instead. At least, he appears to be thrown out. 
TANTHANH BORDER CROSSING, South Vietnam, March 22—A thin trickle of traders—men on bicycles that wobble from the weight of sacks of green Cambodian oranges and women with wig gling chickens and ducks—is still coming across a small stretch of border here between South Vietnam and Cambodia.
WASHINGTON, March 22 —Lawrence H. Zisman of Pis cataway, N. J., has sent six letters to President Nixon and received one reply. And that one made him angry.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 22—The United States Embassy acknowledged today that some of its officers had met periodically with an al leged North Vietnamese spy, but asserted that the meetings had been part of a routine monitoring of political opinion in South Vietnam.
PARIS, March 21 — Robert Sargent Shriver Jr. will end short hut vigorous term as United States Ambassador here next week and return home for a possible venture into politics.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, March 23 (AP) — A bomb exploded in the midst of a Buddhist religious gathering just northwest of Saigon last night, killing 14 women and children and wounding 20 others, South Vietnamese mili tary spokesmen reported.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 22—The new leaders of Cambodia today called on Brit ain and the Soviet Union, the co‐chairmen of the 1954 Gen eva conference, to return the International Control Commis sion here to “help to put a stop in a peaceful way to the oc cupation of its national terri tories.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 22—One of the most potentially significant aspects of the changing political situa tion in Cambodia, in the view of United States officers here, is the increased fighting that has been reported between Cambodian and Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops in the eastern provinces of Cambodia.
The Mylai massacre, which his produced a limited but remarkably candid self‐examination by the United States Army, has precipitated an even broader crisis in conscience for many Americans, including a recent ranking graduate of the United States Military Acad emy at West Point.
WEST POINT, N. Y., March 23 — Amid the roar of saluting cannon and the ruffles and flourishes of a military band, Maj. Gen. William A. Knowl ton officially took over today as the 49th Superintendent of the United States Military Academy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 23—A special session of the Senate concluded today that Deputy Tran Ngoc Chau should have been tried by a ci vilian court instead of a mil itary tribunal.
CHICAGO, March 23 (UPI)— The chief defense attorney of the Chicago Seven filed a mo tion today demanding that the convictions of the five who were found guilty be over turned on grounds that the jury and the prosecuting attorney violated the law.
ALBANY, March 23—An As sembly committee today placed amendments on the Senate passed abortion‐reform bill to restrict abortions performed after the 24th week of preg nancy.
To the Editor:
JAMES H. RADEMACHER Jr., the 48‐year‐old presi dent of the National Associa tion of Letter Carriers, sees his embattled role as that of the hero betrayed by those he would save: “It's like having a leader take you into war in Vietnam, get ready for the final battle, and you shoot him dead.” Mr. Rademacher, throughout the illegal strike by some locals of his unions, has urged his membership to stay at work—or return to their jobs if they had already walked out—so that negotia tions for wage increases could get under way. But his support of the Government position, which has angered some letter carriers, shifted to a defense of his men when President Nixon an nounced the use of troops to the mail.
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 23 — Premier Souvanna Phouma reiterated today his readiness to consider proposals from the Communist‐led Pathet Lao for a settlement of the Laotian war.
PEKING, March 23—Prince Norodom Sihanouk, deposed last Wednesday as Chier of State of Cambodia, announced in a statement issued here to day that he would form a “na tional union government” and a “national liberation army.”
WASHINGTON, March 23 (AP) ‐ A group sponsoring a 75‐day fast for peace in front of the White House announced plans today for a Good Friday procession in the streets. The Clergy and Laymen Concerned about Vietnam and Fellowship of Reconciliation said the pro cession would “symbolize the modern death of Jesus Christ as exemplified by the various temples of death that perptu ate this ?? in the ??.
"KING," an account of the public career of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. compiled and edited from several kinds of documentary footage by Ely Landau, is scheduled to play tonight only at many theaters throughout the country, including more than 50 in the boroughs of New York City. A longer version of the film will eventually be available for purposes of study, but for most moviegoers the theatrical version, which runs for almost three hours, may well seem long enough.In fact it is too long, exactly to the extent that it includes a number of cameo guest appearances by such stars as Paul Newman, Burt Lancaster, James Earl Jones and others who mostly look at the camera and very sincerely recite verse. But the rest of "King," except for a few relevant national-affairs stock shots (Vietnam; Lyndon Johnson's Civil Rights bill), sticks close to its subject, and for its pains achieves a density and shapeliness that is rare in any movie—let alone a documentary committed to the sequence of actual events.Those events begin with the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott, when Dr. King was 27 years old, and they end shortly after his murder in Memphis, in April, 1968. Between, come the confrontations in Birmingham, the 1963 March on Washington, the three Selma voter-registration marches, the housing protests in Chicago, and finally the Memphis sanitation men's strike, which led to Dr. King's death. Even from this short distance, it is good to be reminded of recent history, and what that history, as it generates pride or even mere dramatic urgency, owes to black men in America.Although it makes some attempt to distinguish Dr. King and his nonviolence from the black militants who came after him, and although the distinction is accurate, the film strongly suggests the continuity of Dr. King and his successors in a drive toward a viable group identity. Dr. King's strategies, seen here in rich and spacious detail, seem to have been designed less for winning civil rights as such than for the use of civil rights as a means to human dignity. In Dr. King's platform and pulpit manner (of which there is a good deal) that bid follows a traditional Christian rhetoric for which religious belief and self-dramatization go hand in hand. The manner seems flamboyant, and a little old-fashioned. But it was a real form of communication, and for a while it worked.When it begins not to work, after the fire hoses of Birmingham have been replaced by the lawn sprinklers of Chicago, it strains toward a sense of fulfillment (with many quotations from "The Battle Hymn of the Republic") that really does seem hollow. The film catches this shift with great precision and insight, just as it faithfully records only only bitter victories (for example, the Birmingham jail) but also victorious-seeming defeats (for example, the descent of the celebrities for the end of the third Selma march: a Nichols and May comedy routine, Harry Belafonte singing about the girl in Kingston Town.)But the truth of "King" is ultimately a ceremonial truth, of symbolic gestures, crowds, surging response. I know nothing to compare it with except Leni Riefenstahl's magnificent "Triumph of the Will"—not, of course, in tone or content, but rather in its comprehension of history as drama. But "Triumph of the Will" was history staged for the camera, and "King" is history understood by the camera. "King" attempts no analysis. It raises reportage to the power of ritual, and for all its lapses it is a most solemnly beautiful film.
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 23—The general court martial of a United States Army lieutenant charged with pre mediated murder of a Vietna mese civilian opened here today in a small wooden courthouse.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 23—Lieut. Gem Lon Nol, the Cambodian Premier, said today that his Government was de termined to recover the na t??n's “active neutrality” through the removal of North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops.
WASHINGTON, March 24— A former Army squad leader told a Senate subcommittee today that five of the 12 mem bers of his squad were smoking marijuana as late as 11 o'clock the night before the unit was involved in the alleged Songmy massacre. 
Award. The President pre sented the Presidential Unit Citation for extraordinary heroism in Southeast Asia to Detachment 15, 1st Com bat Evaluation Group, United States Air Force. This detach ment was charged with the responsibility of testing an untried concept of group ra dar control of strategic and tactical bombing strikes against hostile forces and equipment.
WASHINGTON, March 24— The Nixon Administration hopes to cut the level of American forces in South Vietnam by more than half during the next 15 months, according to ranking Government officials. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 24—A spokesman for the United States Military Command said that mail de livery to soldiers in Vietnam today was about normal, ex cept for marines based in Danang. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 24—Presidential Nguyen Van Thieu is scheduled to prom ulgate on Thursday a sweep ing land reform program de signed to make the Government a bigger benefactor of the land less peasant than the Vietcong have been.
NINHQUOI, South Vietnam, March 16—The big box is here. 
ATLANTA, March 24 (AP)— Hearings for three soldiers charged in the alleged Songmy massacre were concluded to day at Fort McPherson here. The hearings will determine whether the three will be tried before a court‐martial.
HONG KONG, March 24— Communist officials and com mentators in Vietnam and Laos have been quicker to react to recent events in Cambodia than their counterparts in China. 
Serious differences existed between Ellsworth Bunker, the United States Ambassador to South Vietnam, and the State Department over the handling of the case of Tran Ngoc Chau, the opposition deputy sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, ac cording to the Newsday col umnist Flora Lewis. 
HEIDELBERG, Germany, March 24 (UPI) — Brig. Gen. George H. Young Jr., charged with suppressing information about the Songmy incident, has been relieved of command of the 24th Infantry Division at Augsburg and has been re assigned to first Army head quarters at Fort Meade, Md., the United States Army an nounced today.
WASHINGTON, March 24— The Government has moved to place new restrictions on po litical demonstrations near the White House. 
WASHINGTON, March 25 — The General Accounting Office has verified that the Pentagon gave $3.6‐million to provide ad ditional pay for a Philippine unit sent to South Vietnam. But whether the Filipino troops ever received the extra pay could not be ascertained by the agency. 
WASHINGTON, March 25— The Defense Department said today that the use of marijuana by American soldiers had risen sharply during the Vietnam war and was now a “very serious” problem. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 25 —Laotian Government forces have repulsed two probing at tacks by North Vietnamese troops against ridgetop posi tions five miles north of Long Tieng.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 25 — North Vietnam and the Vietcong advised Cambodia today that they were recalling all their diplomats from Cam bodia. 
ALBANY, March 25 — After a lengthy debate about its con stitutionality, the Assembly to day passed a bill making it a misdemeanor to read the names of Vietnam war dead at pro test gatherings without the per mission of the next of kin. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 25—South Vietnamese Air Force planes have struck inside Cambodia at least twice in the last week, in support of Cambodian Army operations against the Vietcong, reliable sources said today.
WASHINGTON, March 25 — The White House said to day that no decisions had been made by the Nixon Admini stration on the next reduction of United States combat forces in South Vietnam. 
ANKHE, South Vietnam, March 25 (AP) — A military court‐martial today acquitted Pvt. Russell C. Armstrong, 24 years old, of Erie, Pa., of charges of having murdered a South Vietnamese boy. 
WASHINGTON, March 25 (UN) — Three more Vietnam war veterans have been charged with murder in con nection with the alleged mas sacre at Songmy, South Viet nam, the Army announced to day.
Rapidly moving developments in Cambodia and Laos threaten to engulf the whole of Indochina in a war from which the United States would find it difficult, if not impossible, to extricate itself. These develop ments necessitate prompt and vigorous efforts to find a new peace settlement for the entire region. 
To the Editor: The welcome news that the House Democratic Caucus has decided, however cautiously, to inquire into the sanctimonious seniority system should be viewed as an opportunity to make two sets of improvements.
MONTPELIER, Vt., March 25 —There are only two buildings of consequence in this bucoli state capital.
WASHINGTON, March 26(UPI) —Two House Republicans asked their colleagues today to cut off Vietnam War appropriations. Representatives Donald W. Rie gle Jr. of Michigan and Paul N. McCloskey of California pro posed an amendment to the new Defense Department spend ing hill to limit Vietnam appro priations to the amount needed for orderly withdrawal.
CANTHO, South Vietnam, March 26 (UPI) — President Nguyen Van Thieu signed a law here today designed to give every peasant the land he farms.
PARIS, March 26 — South Vietnam offered today to repa triate 343 sick and wounded North Vietnamese prisoners of war but Hanoi's delegation turned a deaf ear and instead accused the allied side of “cam ouflaging” its efforts to spread the war throughout Indochina.
BRUSSELS — The key to Hanoi's effort to communize South Vietnam has been the technique of sanctuary warfare seeking to outflank and infil trate the main target area from protected bases and supply routes in theoretically neutral Laos and Cambodia.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 26 — The Cambodian Govern ment has called on the popula Ition, the authorities and the armed forces to “keep cool and calm” in face of the apparent unwillingness of North Vietnam and the Vietcong to negotiate on Pnompenh's demand that they withdraw their troops from Cambodia.
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 26 (Reuters)—A young American Army officer told a court‐martial today that he had permitted a sergeant in his platoon to shoot an unarmed Vietnamese prisoner.
MANILA, March 26—Former Defense Secretary Ernesto S. Mata said today that the Phil ippines had received regular checks from the United States made out to the Philippine De fense Department since April 1965, hut he said the money was not connected with the Philippine contingent in Viet nam.
Sgt. John S. was concerned about leaving his wife alone in New York when he went to Vietnam be cause she was pregnant and, being a diabetic, needed special care. He decided to discuss his problem with the Red Cross, and a caseworker referred Mrs. S. to a prenatal clinic where her special needs would be met. Mrs. S. then enrolled in a Red Cross course to learn how to take care of herself through her pregnancy and the baby after it arrived. Red Cross workers assured Sergeant S. that they would continue their concern for his wife while he was away and would be there to help in any emergency. He went to Viet nam secure in the thought that she not alone.
WASHINGTON, March 26 — Administration officials ac knowledged today that despite instructions from the State De partment, Ellsworth Bunker, the United States Ambassador in Saigon, had delayed in pressing for dismissal of criminal charges against Tran Hgou Ngou Chau.
MOSCOW, March 26—Britain today formally asked the So viet Union to back the new Cambodian Government's re quest that the International Control Commission be recalled to Cambodia to help oust North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces from her territory.
SAIGON, South. Vietnam, Friday, March 27—United States fighter‐bombers attacked North Vietnamese gun positions in side Cambodia Tuesday after they had fired on South Viet namese‐rangers operating along the frontier southwest of Sai gon, the United States com mand said yesterday.
The Army's secret report on the Songmy incident concluded that each successive level of command received a more watered‐down account of what had actually occurred in the village. The higher the report went, the lower became its estimate of the number of South Vietnamese allegedly killed by American troops.
WASHINGTON, March 26 (AP)—The Vietnam Moratorium Committee announced plans to day for taxpayer rallies in 33 cities April 15 to protest mili tary and war spending, and called for a fast for peace April 13 through 15.
WASHINGTON, March 26— Senator Edmund S. Muskie opened a new line of attack on President Nixon's Vietnam policy today by charging that the Administration was “short changing” a negotiated settle ment of the Vietnam war.
Good Friday, the holy day commemorating the passion and death of Jesus, was ob served here yesterday by thou sands upon thousands of wor shipers in Roman Catholic and Protestant churches.
WASHINGTON, March 27— Senior officials here said today that a South Vietnamese army battalion with American heli copter gunship support had un dertaken a raid into Cambodia without the prior knowledge or approval of Washington.
Sgt. John S. was concerned about leaving his wife alone in New York when he went to Vietnam be cause she was pregnant and, being a diabetic, needed special care. He decided to discuss his problem with the Red Cross, and a caseworker referred Mrs. S. to a prenatal clinic where her special needs would be met. Mrs. S. then enrolled in a Red Cross course to learn how to take care of herself through her pregnancy and the baby after it arrived. Red Cross workers assured Sergeant S. that they would continue their concern for his wife while he was away and would be there to help in any emergency. He went to Viet nam secure in the thought that she not alone.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 27—The Government of Cam bodia imposed a 6 P.M.‐to 6 A.M. curfew on Pnompenh today, closed the capital's air port to all traffic and intensi fied military security measures throughout the country.
WASHINGTON, March 27 —The Defense Department said today that enemy sol diers who surrender must be taken prisoner.
WASHINGTON, March 27 (UPI)—The Defense Depart ment today identified the fol lowing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in action in Vietnam:

ANPHU, South Vietnam, March 27—South Vietnamese troops, supported by artillery and advance air strikes, launched their first major op eration into Cambodia today.
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 27—Four young infan try officers said under oath to day that United States Army policy, as they understand it, is not to take prisoners in com bat operations in Vietnam.
The Columbia Broaadcasting System blacked out early this morning all but a brief view of Abbie Hoffman, a guest on the Mery Griffin show and one of the Chicago Seven convicted of inciting to riot at the 1968 Dem ocratic National Convention.
WASHINGTON, March 27— The United States blocked a visit here by a South Vietnam ese Deputy, Tran Ngoc Chau, last summer after the embassy in Saigon had advised that his trip would displease President Nguyen Van Thieu, authorita tive quarters said here today.
Thousands of New York tele vision viewers protested yes terday the blanking out of the face and body of Abbie Hoffman during his appearance on Mery Griffin's talk show over the Columbia Broadcast ing System network early yes terday morning. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 28 (Reuters)—A patrol of American soldiers thought they had found an intelligence courier when they spotted a North Vietnamese soldier strol ling down a jungle trail with a bundle of paper under one arm and a rifle under the other. The patrol captured the soldier, who was carrying a copy of Mad Magazine. 
There have been many surprise developments in the case of the alleged massacre at Songmy. At almost every bizarre turn, even men who have been in the roughest combat situations in Vietnam have been stunned. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 28—Demonstrations demanding the return of Prince Norodom Sihanouk as Chief of State con tinued today in provinces along the frontier with South Viet nam, according to official sources. At the same time, the sources reported an increase in “pressure” by North Viet namese and Vietcong troops against Government forces in these frontier regions. 
PARIS, March 28 (UPI)—For eign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Vietnam said today that he believed it would not he necessary for South Vietnam to intervene militarily in Cam bodia.
VIENTIANE, Laos — Ever since it became independent in 1954, this little kingdom has teetered on the brink of a Communist takeover. Now, with North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troops in control of much of the northern part of the country and advancing against Government positions, the Prime Minister, Prince Souvanna Phouma, is strug gling to keep from falling over the brink. 
Former Attorney General Ramsey Clark has denounced the contempt sentences of the “Chicago 7” defendants and their two lawyers as “imper missible by any standard of justice—or, so far as I can see —law.” 
The South Vietnamese Government, in a move to “win the hearts of the people,” launched an ambi tious land‐reform program last week. Admittedly, it was an effort to steal some thunder from the Viet cong, who long have championed land reform.
CHAUDOC, South Vietnam, March 28 — South Vietnamese Rangers crossed the border into Cambodia for the second consecutive day today in an ef fort to trap a Vietcong force es timated at two battalions. 
WASHINGTON, March 28 —The ??mbodian chargé d'affaires said today that the new government had enough military equipment “for the time being” to fight the 50,000 North Vietnamese and Vietcong in the country. 
DALAT, South Vietnam, March 16 — The long‐term success or failure of the Nixon Administration's “Vietnamiza tion” program may well lie here, on the raw and unfinished campus of the Vietnamese Na tional Military Academy, where a future officer corps is being trained.
BOSTON, March 28 — Legis lation intended to challenge the legality of the war in Vietnam is due to reach Gov. Francis W. Sargent in the coming week. It is expected to create political problems for the Republican ex ecutive. 
WASHINGTON, March 28 —The United States secretly presented Nationalist China last year with fighter planes, cargo planes, destroyers, anti aircraft missiles, tanks and rifles reportedly worth $157‐ million. 
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 28—The military judge of a general court‐martial try ing a young U.S. Army officer for the murder of a Vietnamese civilian ruled in effect today that the Vietnam war was no different from any other war in determining what constitutes a war crime. 
South Vietnamese military spokesmen in Saigon denied that it happened. Senior officials in Washington said they had not approved the operation and, in fact, had been unaware of it. But foreign correspondents reported last Friday from Anphu, a South Vietnamese town on the Cambodian border, that a battalion of South Vietnamese rangers supported by South Vietnamese planes and Ameri can helicopter gunships struck across the border that day in the first major allied attack on the Vietnamese Com munists' Cambodian sanctuary. The American advisers with the column were said to have dropped off just before crossed the border; the American helicopters were reported to have hovered on the Vietnamese side of the line, firing into Cambodia.
“It's an S.D.S. plot” more than anything else, Clyde W. McKay Jr., said last week, discussing how he and Alvin Glatkowski had hijacked the munitions ship Columbia Eagle at gunpoint and took it 700 miles to Cambodia. The two men said they were not members of the leftist Students for a Democratic Society, “but we support the groups we believe in if we hold similar ideas and have common ene mies.” The hijackers were being held in detention at a naval base near Pnompenh, but they said their welcome had been friendly. Speaking to a reporter, Mr. McKay said he and Mr. Glatkowski had held the Columbia Eagle's captain and bridge under the gun for four days while they sailed the Gulf of Siam, diverting the vessel from Vietnam into Cambodian waters the week before last. They did it, he said, because they were against the war in Vietnam. Mr. McKay denied reported accusations by other crewmen that they were “pill‐popping, marijuana‐smoking hippies,” saying that they had only taken amphetamine tablets to stay awake during the four days. 

KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., March 28—The White House said to day for the first time that American troops, depending on the judgment of their field com manders, were permitted to cross the Cambodian border in response to enemy threats. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 28 (AP) — The United States Command reported to day that two American heli copters had been shot down with no casualties. 
WASHINGTON, March 28— Lawyers for Capt. John J. Mc Carthy, convicted of murder in Vietnam in 1968, have appealed for a new trial, charging that the Army deliberately ordered a vital defense witness away from the original trial because his testimony might reveal the extent of secret American oper ations in Cambodia.
KHANHAN, South Vietnam, March 28 — More than a thou sand ethnic Vietnamese fled their homes in Cambodia during the last week and crossed into South Vietnam to escape inten sified fighting on the Cam bodian side of the border. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, March 29 —Laotian officials are saying little publicly about events in Cambodia but are watching the situation there in full realiza tion of the fact that Cambodian developments will have far reaching repercussions in Laos.It is recognized here that the closing of the port of Sihanouk ville and other points in Cam bodia as sources of supply for North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in South Vietnam in creases the importance of Laos now that the Vietnam war is becoming, in the view of some observers, an all‐Indochina war. 
The caution Moscow and Washington are manifesting toward the Cambodia coup is well justified by the fluid situa tion that continues in Pnom penh almost two weeks after the ouster of Prince Sihanouk. 
NEAR PREY VOA OUT POST, Cambodia, March 29 (A.P.) — United States and South Vietnamese officers met with the chief of a Cam bodian military outpost here and exchanged pleasantries that they hoped would open the way for more significant talks along the frontier be tween Cambodia and South Vietnam. 
Helping Newspapers
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 29 —A military court convicted a young United States Army officer of the pre meditated murder of a Vietna mese civilian today, and then moved to reconsider its deci sion when told that the convic tion carried a mandatory sen tence of life imprisonment.Lawyers who were present said they could recall no other instance of a court's seeking to change its verdict after being informed of the sentence. A de fense lawyer said he had seen no precedent in his 30 years as a criminal lawyer. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 29—The Government of Cam bodia declared in a communi qué to the population today that Vietnamese Communist troops were intensifying their invasion throughout the fron tier region and moving deeper into Cambodian territory. 
CHICAGO, March 30—The Conspiracy bailed out today 16 men who had been fellow prisoners with the Chicago 7 in the Cook County Jail.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, March 30 — Premier Lon Nol dis closed today that he had in structed the Cambodian Mission to the United Nations to re quest that the Security Council send a team of observers to verify Pnompenh's charges that large numbers of North Viet namese and Vietcong troops have invaded Cambodia.
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, March 30—A military court re voked today a conviction for premeditated murder it pro nounced yesterday on First Lieut. James B. Duffy, who had been charged with order ing the slaying of an unarmed Vietnamese civilian.
WASHINGTON, March 30 (AP)—The following men from New York were identified by the Defense Department today as having been killed in Viet nam:
WASHINGTON, March 30— Intelligence projections of the infiltration flow into South Vietnam, based primarily on aerial reconnaissance of the lengthy route from North Viet nam through Laos, and into Vietnam, indicate that 10,000 to 15,000 North Vietnamese soldiers are expected to enter South Vietnam in Anril.
CHICAGO, March 30 (AP)— Arrest warrants were issued today for Bernardine Dohrn, Kathie Boudin and eight other members of the Students for a Democratic Society after they failed to appear in Circuit Court on charges stemming from a demonstration in September.
SAIGON, March 30 (UPI)— Twelve University of Saigon students were arrested today when they attempted to start hunger strike near the Na tional Assembly building to pro test the arrest of another stu dent, bringing to at least 40 the number of students arrest ed on charges of pro‐Com munist activities in the last three weeks.
The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency reported recently that the world spent more than a trillion dollars for arms in the last six years. What's worse, military spending is on the increase, especially among the developing countries that can afford it least. Worldwide arms purchases last year alone represented a cost of $56 for every person on earth, more than many millions of people in the developing world receive in total annual income.
The Federal Communications Commission has ruled that a television network may, at its discretion, delete or edit ex temporaneous remarks on its programs.
 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, March 30 (AP) — South Viet namese Rangers and armored units were pulled back from the Cambodian border today and moved southwest into the Mekong Delta to reinforce training camp and towns and outposts said to have been bat tered by two days of attacks from North Vietnamese troops.
MANILA, March 30 — Sen ator Salvador Laurel asked the Philippine Senate today to con voke immediately an investiga tive committee “to find out the whole truth whatever it may be” on the charges aired by Senators Stuart Symington and J. W. Fulbright that the Philippines was paid a “hand some fee” for her troop con tingent in South Vietnam.
BOSTON, March 30 (UPI)— The Massachusetts House killed today a Senate amendment to a bill challenging the constitu tionality of the Vietnam war.
Senator George S. McGov ern's proposal to give all Amer ican parents allowances of $50 to $65 a month for each child in this country at a cost of $10 to $35 billion a year in or der to eliminate poverty may be good politics but very poor arithmetic. There are over seventy million children in the U.S. below the age of eighteen, so that even taking the lowest McGovern figure, the scheme would cost over $40 billion a year. 
The refusal of Federal Judge Julius J. Hoffman to let Ramsey Clark, the former United States Attorney Gen eral, testify before the jury in the trial of the “Chicago Seven” constitutes the ultimate outrage in a trial that has become the shame of American justice. Mr. Clark was kept out of the witness stand after an Assistant United States Attorney held that “nothing he could say would possibly be admissible.” 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 31— The United States is planning an evacuation of thousands of civilians in the Plaine des Jarres next week in the expectation of a counteroffensive by Commu nist forces.
A high Pentagon official of the Johnson and early Nixon Administrations, who worked on the secret Paris negotiations on Vietnam, believes the North Vietnamese may now be trying to tell the United States how to break the deadlock in the peace talks. 
PRINCETON, N.J., Jan. 31— In the year since President Nixon took office, the high cost of living has risen from fourth to second place among the most important problems facing the American people, accord ing to the Gallup Poll. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31—A panel of prominent citizens headed by former Justice Arthur J. Goldberg proposed a five‐ point program today to improve the manner in which the Presi dent, Congress and concerned citizens take part in making foreign policy in the years after the Vietnam war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Jan. 31 (AP)—A grenade devised as a time bomb was discovered in the washroom of an Air Viet nam jet today. There were 86 passengers and a crew of seven aboard the Boeing F2‐F, which had flown from Danang to Saigon. As the plane was taxiing toward the airport ter minal a stewardess noticed smoke, opened the door of a restroom and found a package.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb. 1 (UPI)—The United States command said to day that enemy forces shot down a United States Army helicopter and attacked two American military bases north of Saigon yesterday and early oday. 
HOLAN, South Vietnam, Jan. 29 — Enraged after two mine explosions killed six South Ko rean marines and wounded a Korean and three Americans, South Korean troops stormed into a village near Danang last spring, allied officials say, and killed three South Vietnamese civilians, including two women in their beds.
ALBANY, Jan. 31 — Sharp criticism of Senator Charles E. Goodell's voting record and his “late conversion” to the anti war movement were empha sized by a panel of Democratic senatorial aspirants today as the key to defeating him in November.
SAIGON—Every day for the last 15 months, sleek American jet fighters specially rigged for high‐speed reconnaissance have taken off from air bases in Thai land and aircraft carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin and have headed north towards Hanoi. Their mis sion is essentially the same as it was before the announcement of a bombing halt on Oct. 1, 1968: to track the movement of enemy troops and matériel inside North Vietnam and in the Communist dominated portions of Laos. 
WASHINGTON, Jan. 31— The Pentagon has acknowl edged that it faces problems in getting United States news men full access to areas con trolled by South Vietnamese forces as the “Vietnamization” of the war moves ahead.
Plans for a referendum to poll the attitude of American blacks on the Vietnam war were announced last week by a group of Negro churchmen and other leaders. 
SYDNEY, Australia, Jan. 31— Drug abuse, especially among the young, has increased dra matically in Australia in the last year, according to testimony be fore a Senate committee irrvesti gating the problem.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Feb. 2—The United States command said today that Vietcong and North Vietnamese forces staged more than 70, Irocket, mortar and ground at tacks in South Vietnam during the weekend, inflicting the heaviest casualties on Ameri can forces in a month.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1—At 1 o'clock in the morning one day last week, four professional men—a doctor, two lawyers and an accountant—gathered in a Capitol Hill office whose walls were covered with pictures of Franklin D. Roosevelt, Norman Thomas, Wendell L. Willkie and Robert F. Kennedy. 
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1—Following is the text of the conclusions in a Senate Foreign Relations Committee staff study on Vietnam, made public today:
WE are about to enter upon The Great Midi Crisis of 1970. In certain quar ters, it is sure to rival pollution as the No. 1 issue of the year. Not to mention Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 1—The Senate Foreign Relations Com mittee made public a report to day suggesting that the Nixon Administration's policy of Viet namization rests on dubious as sumptions about the abilities of the Saigon Government and the military intentions of North Vietnam. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Feb. 1— Prince Souvanna Phouma, the Laotion Premier said here yes terday that he was prepared to “close his eyes” to the exist ence of the Ho Chi Minh Trail in eastern Laos if North Viet nam withdrew its 50,000 troops from the rest of the country. The Premier said further that in that event he would call for a halt in the air attacks against Communist‐held regions else where in Laos.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 — The North Vietnamese leadership has warned the nation to be prepared to fight the United States for “many years more” to force the full withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 (Reu ters)—The White House today responded to questions about critical Congressional report on the Vietnam war by stating that the program to turn all aspects of United States in volvement in South Vietnam over to the Vietnamese was progressing well. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 2 (AP) — The South Korean command acknowledged today that four Vietnamese civilians were killed by Korean marines last April in an incident south of Danang, but said their deaths were accidental. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 2 (UPI)—President Nguyen Van Thieu announced tonight that the South Vietnamese‐Gov ernment would free 1,324 polit ical prisoners for Tet, the three‐day Lunar New Year holi day that begins Friday. The official broadcast over the Government radio and televi sion network said other prison ers would also be freed. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2—The Adminis tradition's $71.8‐billion military budget, which represents the lowest share of Federal spending for defense in the last 20 years, reflects these basic, under lying decisions: 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 — Sixty‐five members of the anti war movement filed suit against the Dow Chemical Com pany in district court today, charging that Dow supplies the United States Government “with the instrumentalities to violate international law” and should be made to stop. 
WASHINGTON Feb 2—By the fiscal year 1975, the Gov ernment should be collecting $64‐billion more in taxes of all kinds than it does now, with out any further changes in the tax laws. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 2—Judge Julius J. Hoffman closed the defense case in the Chicago conspiracy trial today minutes before the Rev. Ralph David Abernathy arrived to be its last witness. 
WASHINGTON Feb. 2—Following is the text, photograph ical reproduced, of President Nixon's Budget Message as presented to Congress today:
SAIGON, Tuesday, Feb. 3 (AP) — The South Vietnamese Government said today that its troops would observe a 24‐hour cease‐fire beginning at 6 P.M. Thursday for Tet, the Lunar New Year.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 3— With Senator J. W. Fulbright setting a critical tone, the Sen ate Foreign Relations Commit tee reopened the Vietnam de bate today. Vice President Ag new, who was criticized at the hearing, accused Democrats of “casting about aimlessly” for a way to discredit the Admin istration.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 3 (UPI) — Mrs. Spiro T. Agnew said today that her husband “speaks for himself” when he makes his speeches. But she added, “I usually agree with him.” The Vice President's wife also told newswomen in the Agnews' Sheraton Park Hotel apartment here that the controversy sur rounding her husband's pro nouncements about the news media and antiwar protesters did not bother her. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 4 (AP)—Viet cong gunners fired 10 rockets into the Bienhoa air base, 15 miles north of Saigon, late yes terday. There were no Ameri can casualties and damage was light, a United States spokes man said.
CHICAGO, Feb. 3—The color of the Vietcong flag became the latest point of contention at the Chicago conspiracy trial today. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 3 (Reu ters)—Henry Cabot Lodge, for mer chief United States nego tiator at the Vietnam peace talks in Paris, held an unan nounced meeting at the White House today to discuss the stalemated negotiations. White House aides said he had con ferred with President Nixon's adviser on national security, Henry A. Kissinger. 
Defense Department explanations of why four “Government investigators” were issued press creden tials in Saigon are confused, incomplete and evasive. In the absence of a more credible accounting, it hard to escape the conclusion that undercover inform ers were used to try to spy on reporters and their news sources. Such a practice would constitute an intolerable threat to press freedom. 
Feb. 3, 1970
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Feb. 5 (AP)—North Vietnamese infantrymen as saulted a remote United States fire base north of Saigon yester day, then regrouped and at tacked an American patrol sweeping the perimeter. 
The Vietnam hearings of the Senate Foreign Rela tions Committee are taking place in the wake of an on‐the‐spot staff study that emphasizes many previ ously expressed doubts about President Nixon's policy of Vietnamization. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 4 (AP) —Two national peace groups are making plans for 70 days of fasting in Washington to protest the war in Vietnam. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 4—A melee broke out at the Chicago con spiracy trial today, with Fed eral marshals and the, defend ants scuffling and shoving‐ in the well of the court. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 4 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following marines from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
CHICAGO, Feb. 4 (AP)— Sidney Peck, 43‐year‐old assist ant professor of sociology at Case Western Reserve Univer sity in Cleveland, was con victed today for aggravated assault and resisting arrest in a street disorder during the Democratic National Conven tion here in August, 1968.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 4— Senator Hugh Scott, the Senate Republican leader, defended the Administration's Vietnam policy today before the Sen ate Foreign Relations Commit tee, asserting that President Nixon's program of troop with drawal was “irreversible.” 
BANGKOK, Thailand, Thurs day, Feb. 5 (UPI)—The United States Embassy said today that a B‐52 bomber en route to a Vietnam mission dropped its 30‐ton bomb load on a sparsely populated region of Thailand by accident Monday. Two women were reported wounded.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 4 — A South Vietnamese policeman has won a medal of hohor and national recognition for his actions the night of Jan. 15, when he refused a $10 bribe. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5 (UPI) —The Pentagon today identi fied 16 servicemen as having been killed in Vietnam, includ ing Pfc. Luis A. Lebron of New ark of the Army. 
The American experience in Vietnam has brought forth a new form of isolationism, ac cording to the Louis Harris Survey. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 5—Defend ants in the Chicago conspiracy trial fired a barrage of abuse at Judge Julius J. Hoffman to day. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 5 (AP)—American fighter‐bomb ers attacked enemy missile and gun positions in North Vietnam oil Monday for the second time in a week after unarmed recon naissance jets came under in tense antiaircraft fire, the Unit ed States command disclosed today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 5—The normally chaotic streets of Saigon fell silent to night, the shops and restau rants closed and most Viet namese went home to bid a rueful good‐by to the Year of the Rooster and an anxious welcome to the Year of the Dog. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5—Two soldiers who have made public statements supporting the war in Vietnam have drawn Con gressional criticism for doing so with the apparent approval of superiors in the Pentagon. 
HONG KONG, Friday, Feb. 6 (Reuters)—A recorded message from the late President Ho Chi Minh was broadcast today in North Vietnam at the beginning of celebrations of Tet, the Lu nar New Year. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 5—Sen ator J. W. Fulbright, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said today that President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam was persecuting an Opposition leader for expos ing the President's “political bag man” with the National Assembly. 
Carswell Defended
Feb. 5, 1970
PARIS, Feb. 5 — North Viet nam hinted today that it might not be willing to meet with the United States privately so long as the American delegation was headed by Philip C. Habib as acting chief. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 7 (AP) — The allies resumed offensive opera tions throughout South Vietnam last night at the end of their 24‐hour cease‐fire, which, they said, had been marked by num erous enemy violations. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Feb. (AP)—The Army dropped today a charge of murder against First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., now facing court‐martial for the alleged massacre of 102 Vietnamese civilians at My Lai in March, 1968. The charge filed Nov. 29, 1969, alleged that Lieutenant Calley killed an adult male in Quang Ngai prov ince approximately one and half months before the My Lai incident. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6 — Senator Jacob K. Javits said today that the Saigon Govern ment's timetable for withdrawal of United States combat forces appeared to be a year and possibly two years longer than the Nixon Administration. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 6 (AP)—The United States command announced today that the person who placed four agents in the Saigon press corps had been reprimanded and transferred to a new assign ment. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 6—Two de fendants showed up at the Chi cago conspiracy trial this morn ing wearing black judicial robes, but soon afterward Judge Julius J. Hoffman ruled that they and the five other men at the defense table were just defendants. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6 (AP) — Two of nine defendants were found guilty today of willfully destroying Dow Chemical Corn pany property in an antiwar demonstration. They were con victed after they pleaded no contest to one charge against them. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 6 (AP) — In a move pos sibly foreshadowing the with drawal of all remaining United States Marine forces in South Vietnam, the United States command announced today that the United States Army would assume over‐all com mand from the Marines on March 9 in the five northern provinces. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 6—In a rambling but at times fer vent conversational memoir, former President Lyndon Johnson offered today his version of the events two years ago that led to an end of the American troop build‐up in Vietnam, a partial halt in the bombing of North Viet nam and his decision not to run for re‐election.
To End Job Bias
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Feb. 7—Tran Ngoc Chau, an Opposition deputy ac cused by President Nguyen Van Thieu of Communist affilia tions, says he feels he has been betrayed by the America mis sion here despite a long and close working relationship. 
TO THE EDITOR:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7—The Democratic Policy Council will be asked at a meeting on Mon day to advocate the withdrawal from Vietnam of all American troops, combat and noncombat, within 18 months. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 7 — Antiwar protesters will an nounce plans early next week for a “winter‐spring offensive” that will include mailing Bibles to draft boards in March and parading against war taxes in April. 
CHICAGO—“You're a disgrace to the Jews, runt.” 
A 22‐year‐old Army lieuten ant is to go on trial tomorrow in South Vietnam charged with the “premeditated murder” of a suspected Vietcong agent last September, according to his lawyer in New York. 
PARIS—Few dealers in weap onry are fond of the appelation “merchants of death.” When it was pinned last week on Michel Debre, the hot‐tempered French Defense Minister was deeply stung.Most painful was that the ac cusation came from within the majority bloc of deputies in the National Assembly. Michel Poni atowski, chairman of the Inde pendent Republicans and chief political aide to Finance Minister Valery Giscard d'Estaing, opened fire at a party meeting Monday night. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 7 (AP)—An explosion that killed one Marine and wounded 62 others in an enlisted men's club near Danang Thursday may have been set off by an American rather than by Viet Cong terrorists, Marine Corps officials said today. 
SAIGON—For Vietnamese, the Tet Lunar New Year festival that began here last week is tradi tionally a time for introspection, a four‐day pause in which to reassess the year gone by and consult fortune tellers about the future.
Despite the Administra tion's claims of progress, Vietnam remains our most urgent overseas problem and our most divisive and bitter domestic one. Our national interests require that the war in Vietnam be brought to a close at the earliest practical moment. The loss of life, the diversion of resources from critical domestic needs and the disunity of our country must be ended. 
SAIGON.
WASHINGTON—The Congres sional doves were aflutter Iast week. Their long muted cries were heard again in the land as they challenged the Nixon policy in Vietnam.
CHICAGO, Feb. 7 (AP)—The Government concluded its re buttal to the defense today in the trial of seven men charged with conspiracy to incite riots at the time of the 1968 Demo cratic National Convention. 
SEATTLE, Feb. 7—A Soviet employe of the United Nations was arrested today and charged with espionage in trying to ob tain secret information about the missile defense of the Pa cific Northwest. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Feb. 7 (Reuters)—The giant airlift of 18,000 refugees whose homes are endangered by a threat ened North Vietnamese at tack on the strategic Plaine des Jarres should be com pleted by early next week, United States sources said to day. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 7 (AP)—The United States command sent B‐52 bombers back over South Vietnam today, ignoring a Vietcong cease‐fire for Tet, the Lunar New Year. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 8 (UPI)—Australian enter tainers who were performing for United States Marines when a grenade explosion in an en listed men's club killed marine and wounded 62 others said today that they had seen grenades lobbed from each side of the club. 
MIAMI, Feb. 8 (AP)—Former Vice President Hubert H. Hum phrey conceded today that President Nixon “is making political points” with his Viet nam policy, but the Minnesota Democrat said the Administra tion needed to establish a time table for troop withdrawal.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 8 —A bomb thought to be 20 pounds of plastic exploded this evening at the office of the South Vietnamese National Press Center, destroying the building's second‐floor offices and setting a fire. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 9 (UPI)—A United States Navy river patrol boat strayed into Cambodian waters last week and was seized by Cambodian forces, the United States head quarters reported today. The vessel and its five‐man crew are being held.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Feb. 10 (Reuters) A United States Army helicop ter crashed here today, killing the 12 men aboard. All aboard were Americans, military sources said.
CHICAGO, Feb. 9—Testimony was formally completed today in the Chicago conspiracy trial and the marathon case moved rapidly toward an end.
SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 9— Representative George E. Brown Jr. of Los Angeles, now hi his fourth term in the House of Representatives, announced today his candidacy for the Democratic nomination to op pose Senator George Murphy's bid for a second term.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9 (AP) —A major antiwar group an nounced today a three months' Campaign of rallies, picketing and demonstrations against civ il rights repression, the draft and war spending. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 (AP) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the fol lowing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
FORT BENNING, Ga., Feb. 9 —The commanding general of Fort Benning and two of the high officers of this infan try training center denied em phatically today that President Nixon and the Pentagon had in fluenced the decision to bring First Lieut. William L. Caney Jr. to general court‐martial for the alleged massacre at Mylai in South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9 — The leading officials of the Nixon Administration are con fident that the military situa tion in South Vietnam is now good enough to permit the un interrupted withdrawal of most United States ground combat forces over the next 18 months. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—The United States and the Govern ment of Laos have agreed that Laotian forces in the Plaine des Jarres will not try to hold the plain against attacking North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces but will fight a delaying action and fall back in an or derly fashion. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 9—The Democratic Policy Council, the party's official voice on policy matters, called today for “a firm and unequivocal commitment” to withdraw all American military forces from Vietnam on a definite time table.
Vice President Agnew, Gov. Ronald Reagan, Mayor Sam Yorty and S. I. Hayakawa share a striking trait. Heard one on top of another—all four in three days, during a recent California excursion — each demonstrated the kind of simple plausibility that in these baf fling days Americans seem most to desire from their poli ticians. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10 (AP)—The Government re leased 176 prisoners of war to mark the Lunar New Year, the Government press agency, Viet nam Press, said today. It said 93 prisoners had been freed at the provincial prison in Hue and 83 in Tamky.
Quality in Education
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 (AP) —A House subcommittee re ported that the Vietnam paci fication program substantially increased security in the South Vietnam countryside last year but did not seriously counter Vietcong political activity. 
THOTNOT, South Vietnam, Feb. 8—When an American vis itor turned up in this Mekong Delta district yesterday, the to tal American presence doubled by virtue of his arrival.
Feb. 10, 1970
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10 (Reuters)—A military court has ordered two members of the lower house to face ques tioning on alleged pro‐Com munist activities. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10— Seven of the nine members of an antiwar group that de stroyed files and equipment at the offices of the Dow Chem ical Company last March were found guilty today on two charges of malicious destruc tion of property and one of unlawful entry.
The American Broadcasting Company, after almost a week's delay, explained yesterday why it had censored the remarks of Judy Collins, the folk singer, about the Chicago conspiracy trial presided over by Judge Julius J. Hoffman. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 10—The seven defendants in the Chica go conspiracy trial came here in August, 1968, to develop a National Liberation Front and start the revolution, the Gov ernment contended today in its final arguments.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 10—Secretary of Defense Mel vin R. Laird; the man who coined the term “Vietnamiza tion,” arrived here tonight to review the progress of that program during the last year. 
ST. LOUIS, Feb. 10 (AP)— Vice President Agnew told Missouri Republicans tonight that policies voiced by Senator J. W. Fulbright amounted to a “blueprint for defeat in Viet nam and retreat from the world.” 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Feb. 10 —The man who signed murder charges against First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. said to day that he had led “a sort of rebellion” among the young law officers of this post early last September when it appeared to them that the Nixon Ad ministration and Pentagon of ficials might be trying to cover up the alleged Sogmy mas sacre. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 11—United States fighter bombers attacked enemy gun positions inside Cambodia to day after an American light observation helicopter was struck by ground fire from Cambodia and exploded in the air, United States spokesmen said.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 11 (AP) —The Pentagon today identi fied th, following servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: 
CHEOREO, South Vietnam, Feb. 8—In an uprising four years ago the mountain tribes men of Phubon Province in the Central Highlands came close to capturing this dusty capital from the South Vietnamese gov ernment.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 11—Defense Secretary Melvin R. Laird said today that Amer ican warplanes would continue to take whatever steps neces sary to protect themselves dur ing reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 11—An unorthodox Ash Wednesday service in a downtown church today marked the beginning of a 75‐day protest against the the Vietnam war. The action begun today, the beginning of Lent, will continue through Passover.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 11 (AP) — The helicop ters roared into the Special Forces camp in the jungles 45 miles northeast of Saigon and the colonels and majors de scended, looking for souvenirs for their game rooms back home. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 11—The war in Vietnam has claimed more than 12,000 deaths among draftees, most of them in the army, the Pentagon said today. 
Many thoughtful Congressmen in both Houses have been protesting against Presidential prerogatives that, without real consultation, have taken the country into a large‐scale war in Vietnam, ill‐disclosed commit ments elsewhere in Asia and an accelerating nuclear arms race with Russia.
PARIS, Feb. 11—Xuan Thuy, chief of the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace talks, confirmed tonight that there would be no secret talks as long as the United States Maintained Philip C. Habib as acting head of its delegation.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Feb. 11 —A, military judge ruled today that the Army had jurisdiction to try First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. on charges of killing 102 Vietnamese civilians at My lai 4, in the Songmy village complex, in 1968. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 11—The de fense in the Chicago conspiracy trial contended today that the Government “concocted” its case against the seven defend ants to justify the police vio lence against demonstrators during the Democratic National convention here in 1968. 
Management. President Nixon signed an Executive order establishing the Presi dent's Advisory Council on Management Improvement. The council will be chaired by Bernard A. Schriever, the former Air Force missile di rector. 
PARIS, Feb. 12—The four delegations to the Paris peace talks found nothing new to say to one another today and made the 54th plenary session one of the shortest on record. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Feb. 12 —A tentative date in mid‐May for the court‐martial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., charged with the murder of 102 Vietnamese civilians, was set today by Lieut. Col. Reid W. Kennedy military judge.
CHICAGO, Feb. 12 — The defendants in the Chicago con spiracy trial were compared today to an illustrious line of “outside agitators.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Feb. 13 (AP)—North Vietnamese troops in concealed positions ambushed a United States Marine patrol in the Queson Valley south of Danang yesterday, and 13 of the Ameri cans were killed in the battle. Twelve other marines were wounded. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 12— The Pentagon is studying a pro posal to provide enough modern sensing devices so that South Vietnam could seal its entire 900‐mile border against sizable enemy infiltration. 
CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., Feb. 12 (AP)—Thirty marines were injured in a fight involv ing three Negroes who stormed a barracks last night in a stag ing area for men headed for Vietnam, a marine spokesman said today. There were no seri ous injuries. As many Negroes as whites were reported in jured. No specific reasons for the disturbance were made public. 
LONGBINH, South Viet nam, Feb. 12 (UPI) — Army unit publications in South Vietnam have received an of ficial “suggestion” that they stop emphasizing “hard com bat news” and replace it with “reports of the progress of our efforts in the fields of Vietnamization, pacification and civil action.” 
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Feb. 12 (UPI)—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird con ferred today with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam and affirmed Pres dent Nixon's decision to con tinue the withdrawal of American troops. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 12— The Army has charged Capt. Thomas K. Willingham, a 25‐ year‐old infantry officer, with the unpremeditated murder of Vietnamese civilians in the vil lage of Songmy on March 16, 1968. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Feb. 13 (Agence France‐Presse)—The North Vietnamese Government has published a resolution con cerning the opening of a “pro ductive labor movement,” de signed to put into effect the economic plan for 1970. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 13—A Gov ernment lawyer labeled the de fendants in the Chicago con spiracy trial today “evil men” who want to “stand on the rub ble of our destroyed system of government.”
VIENTIANE, Laos, Feb. 13 —The Defense Ministry said that elements of two North Vietnamese divisions, over coming Laotian resistance on the ground and largely pro tected by clouds from United States air strikes, drove Gov ernment forces today from several important positions and advanced into the north east quadrant of the Plaine des Jarres.
THOIBINH, South Vietnam, Feb. 9—At the end of a wobbly board out over the canal bank, a wrinkled woman squatted and washed her family's breakfast dishes in the brown water as sampans loaded with baskets of green vegetables, rice and people in conical straw hats passed by.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 13—Secretary of Defense Mel vin R. Laird said today that the withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam would continue despite the stalemate in the Paris negotiations and the persistence of a substantial enemy threat on the battlefield. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 13 (Reuters)—Two more Amer icân helicopters have been shot down in Vietnam, injuring seven Americans and 16 South Viet namese, a United States spokes man said today. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 13 — The attorney for Capt. Thomas K. Willingham, the ranking Army figure to be charged with crimes in the Vietnamese vil lage of Songmy, said today that his client was accused of kill ing “20 Vietnamese civilians.”
Protective Shields
WASHINGTON, Feb. 13— The long‐term success of the pacification program may be in doubt, the latest reports from South Vietnam indicate, be cause of an inability to destroy the underground Vietcong “shadow government” and of resurgence of terrorism against village officials.
WRIGHTSTOWN, N. J., Feb. 14—A bomb that slightly in jured at least three persons exploded shortly before 9 P.M. tonight inside a coffeehouse here that has been a center of antiwar activity involving sol diers at nearby Fort Dix.
BOSTON, Feb. 14 (AP)— Time Inc. has asked the Fed eral District Court here to dis miss a $110‐million libel suit filed by Capt. Ernest Medina, of the Army. Time contended it had a right to publish an article about the alleged massacre at Songmy in South Vietnam.
THE crisis in New York City's housing, if left unchecked, will lead to the hopeless decay many neighborhoods, giving them the bombed out, Vietnam‐like appearance already observable Brownsville‐East New York. To reverse this trend will take major efforts—an initial $100‐million an nually in higher rents from rent‐controlled families who can afford the payments; about $200‐million from the city's capital budget for rehabilitation loan expenditures and, finally, about $100‐million in city expense budget outlays for rent assistance to fam ilies unable to pay higher rents and for major expan sion of staff and facilities to administer the program. 
By withdrawing 65,000 American troops in his first year in office and promising to remove another 50,000 by April 15, President Nixon has defused the Vietnam debate in the United States. Although neither the debate nor the war has ended, the shape of the argu ment has been considerably altered. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb, 15—The South Vietnamese Government has decided to open an entertain ment center offering legalized gambling and dancing in an effort to close its perennial budget deficit. 
FORT LEWIS, Wash., Feb. 14 (AP)—Pvt. Wade Carson of Warner Robins, Ga., was con victed at a court‐martial yes terday of attempting to distrib ute “unauthorized literature” on this Army base. Private Carson, a Vietnam veteran, was sentenced to five months at hard labor, and his $109 a month pay during that period was ordered forfeited. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 14 (Reuters)—A young housewife in an Alabama city hurriedly tore open a flimsy airletter a few weeks ago, getting confir mation for the first time that her husband, an airman shot down in 1965, was a prisoner in North Vietnam. 
SAIGON—The “fact‐finding” visits of American Defense Sec retaries to Vietnam have taken on such a ritualistic sameness over the years that one tends to be indistinguishable from another. 
THOITHUAN, South Viet nam, Feb. 10 — This is a tale of two pigs—a Vietnamese pig and an American pig. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Feb. 15 (AP)—North Vietnamese troops ambushed an American armored patrol near the Cambodian border yesterday, killing eight soldiers and destroying two tanks, the United States command said today. Thirty Americans were reported to have been wounded. 
To Outlaw Starvation
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, Feb. 14 (UPI)—A 20‐year‐old Long Island soldier accused of shooting to death a 14‐year‐old South Vietnamese boy will be court‐martialed on Monday, military spokesmen said today. 
PRINCETON. N. J., Feb. 14— A majority of Americans con tinue to oppose immediate withdrawal of United States troops from Vietnam, the Gal lup Poll reported today. How ever, the per cent who favor such a course has increased sharply since a mid‐November survey. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 14 — Judge Julius J. Hoffman sentenced four of the defendants in the Chicago conspiracy trial today to lengthy prison terms for con temnt of court. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 15—Repre sentative Allard K. Lowenstein of Nassau County, L. I., will offer tomorrow to resign his seat if Governor Rockefeller agrees to call a special election in 60 days. 
The American Civil Liberties Union deplored yesterday the contempt sentences against de fendants in the Chicago con spiracy trial and accused Judge Julius J. Hoffman of an “ex traordinary and unconstitution al” misuse of power. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 15—“We never meant to stay here permanently,” Nguyen Huu Khoa said, smiling a little at the memory. “We planned to go back to the village as soon as the fighting stopped. But that was eight years ago and the war is still on and we are still here.” 
CHICAGO, Feb. 15—The mother of one of the de fendants in the Chicago con spiracy trial was admitted to a hospital here tonight after taking an apparent overdose of tranquilizers. 
CLEVELAND, Feb. 15 —The Student Mobilization Commit tee called today for massive antiwar demonstrations across the country during the week of April 13 to 18. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 15—The two defense attorneys and three of the defendants in the Chicago conspiracy trial were sentenced to prison for contempt of court today. 
Conflict Among Pupils
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Mon day, Feb. 16 (AP)—South Viet namese rangers and an armored brigade trapped an enemy dem olition battalion 18 miles south of Danang yesterday and all but wiped it out, allied spokes men said today. 
TOKYO, Feb. 15 (AP)—Dep uty Foreign Minister Nikolai P. Firyubin of the Soviet Union is in Hanoi, North Vietnam's official press agency repoted today. The agency said Mr. Firyubin and a delegation were welcomed upon their arrival Friday by Foreign Ministry of cials. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 15— Several hundred persons gath ered this afternoon in Lafayette Park, across the street from the White House, to hear former Senator Ernest Gruening of Alaska and others denounce the Nixon Administration's policy on the Vietnam war and other issues.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 16 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the fol lowing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
WASHINGTON, Feb. 16— For all their current dif ficulties, the United States and Egypt have developed a new form of diplomacy to circumvent their formal breach in diplomatic rela tions.
Fifteen persons were arrest ed and seven policemen and three demonstrators were re ported injured yesterday when a crowd estimated at 3,000 peo ple paraded in lower Manhat tan to protest the contempt citation in the Chicago conspir acy trial and “other acts of political repression.” 
The worst thing about the extremely severe con tempt sentences imposed upon the Chicago Seven and their attorneys is that they serve just the purpose the defendants had in mind throughout of bringing into question the impartiality of the American judicial system. 
MOCHOA, South Vietnam, Feb. 16 — “Trouble with the South Vietnamese is they're, afraid to take risks,” said one United States Navy engineman as he piloted a river‐patrol boat through “Indian country” near the Camhndian border. 
ALBANY, Feb. 16—Governor Rockefeller, hinting at the power of lawyers in the Legislature, indicated today he did not ex pect his proposal for a sweeping change in automobile insurance laws to pass this year. 
WRIGHTSTOWN, N.J., Feb. 16 (UPI) — One soldier re mained hospitalized today with injuries suffered Saturday night in a bombing attack on an antiwar coffeehouse near Fort Dix. 
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, Feb. 16 (UPI)—Two United States soldiers went on trial today before separate courts martial on charges of killing 2 South Vietnamese.
ROME, Feb. 16 (AP)—Four clergymen from New York, representing four faiths, flew to Rome today to seek the support of Pope Paul VI for their attempt to visit Ameri can prisoners of war in North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 16— Judge Julius J. Hoffman ap pears to have skirted the edges of several judical precedents in sentencing two defense lawyers in the Chicago conspiracy trial to long prison terms for con tempt. According to the author of the book. “The Contempt Power,” the four‐year, 13‐day sentence imposed on one attorney. William M. Kunst er, is apparently the longest sen tence for contempt ever imposed in an American court. Judge Hoffman sentenced a second defense lawyer, Leon ard L Weinglass, to 20 months, 5 days in prison. In each case, the lawyers were said to have used insulting and contemptu ous tactics in the course of the long, frequently bizarre and raucus trial, which is now in the hands of the jury.
CHICAGO, Feb. 16—The jury in the Chicago conspiracy trial completed its third day of de liberations today without reach ing a verdict. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 17— A wave of violence, including the second police station bomb ing within five days, struck cities around San Francisco Bay last night. 
A Roman Catholic priest was shoved out of the City Council chamber by guards yesterday after he disrupted a meeting by shaking his fist and shouting at the Councilmen on the floor below. 
SEATTLE, Feb. 17 (UPI) — A thousand demonstrators charged the United States Courthouse today in a protest against the Chicago riot con spiracy trial. They battled the police, threw rocks through windows and lobbed tear gas into the building. 
TRACU, South Vietnam, Feb. 16—“Better Killing Through Electronics,” said a sign some one had pasted up in the naval operations center of the small hase near the Vamcodong River, 20 miles west of Saigon. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 17—The Administration formally told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today that despite “some illegal killing” Opera tion Phoenix — a controversial program in South Vietnam ostensibly designed to weed out Vietcong agents—could not be regarded as a “counter‐terror” organization. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Feb. 17— Korth Vietnamese troops, de spite what one diplomatic source here today called “the most intensive United States bombing in the history of the Laotian war,” are reported to have driven Government troops From more than 20 positions in and around the Plaine des Jarres. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 17—As a controversial opera tion known as Phoenix moves into its third year and to center stage today at Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearings in Washington, American of ficals here privately continue to call it one of the most im portant and least successful programs in South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 17 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day listed the names of the fol lowing servicemen from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
Activities. The President had an early morning meet ing with Republican Congres sional leaders. Later in the morning the President re ceived a report from Defense Secretary Laird on his recent Vietnam trip and saw John J. McCloy, chairman of the Advisory Committee on Dis armament and Arms Control. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 18 (AP)— A South Vietnamese artillery bat tery accidentally fired 12 shells into the Bienhoa air base com plex last night and early today killing three Americans and wounding 20, allied spokesmen disclosed. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 17—Defense attorneys in the Chicago con spiracy trial filed a motion for a mistrial this afternoon on the presumption that the jury was hopelessly deadlocked. 
A woman who said she survived a massacre in the area of Songmy in South Vietnam said yesterday that American troops had entered her hamlet and had begun shooting chil dren. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 18—Quiet, dark‐haired Susan Schultz was on the edge of tears as she slipped through a group of young people and sat in front of the microphones Linder the bright television lights. 
VIETNAM—The President listed signs of progress: success in the pacification program, greater enemy diffi culties in recruitment and supply, a drop in Vietcong con trol over the rural population. But he also said “Vietnamiza tion is still a developing process, and enemy intentions on the battlefield are unclear.” He said that the “key to peace” lay in whether Hanoi wished to negotiate in good faith. 
Hunter College's assembly hall was filled to capacity last night to hear several speakers denounce the verdicts at the trial of the Chicago 7 and con demn the charges here against 13 Black Panthers. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 18—Following, as made public by the White House, is the text President Nixon's first annual foreign‐affairs message to Congress, which was submitted today. under the title “United States Foreign Policy for the 1970's: A New Strategy for Peace”:
The suggestion in your Jan. 31 editorial—and in previous editorials—that the Newspaper Preservation bill could provide “a shield to established pub lishers against the entrance of new journalistic competitors” ignores the realities. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 18—In tensive studies conducted re cently by the Administration in South Vietnam and private re ports from the area have led President Nixon to see “tangi ble progress” in the “Vietnami zation” of the war and success “to date” in the pacification of the Vietnam countryside. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 18—All sev en defendants in the Chicago conspiracy trial were acquitted today of plotting to incite a riot here during the 1968 Democratic National Conven tion, but five of them were convicted of seeking to pro mote a riot through individual acts. 
The verdict in the Chicago conspiracy trial brought a range of contrasting reactions from individuals and organiza tions yesterday. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 18 (UPI) —The Defense Department an nounced today that Lance Cpl. John Marks, a Marine, of East Hartford, Conn., had been killed in action in Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 18 (AP)—Members of the Sen ate Foreign Relations Com mittee today reacted with hope—and a touch of skep ticism—to testimony that pacification was succeeding in South Vietnam. 
SYDNEY, Australia, Feb. 18 —Wilfred Burchett, a leftist Australian newsman known for his reports from the Communist side in Korea and Vietnam, was prevented today from coming to Aus tralia to attend a memorial service for his brother. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 18 (AP)—Informed sources re ported today that B‐52 bombing raids in South Vietnam had been halted for 36 hours while the planes, the biggest bombers the United States has, went into action for the first time against North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troops threatening the Plaine des Jarres in Laos. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Feb. 18— North Vietnamese supported by tanks mounted their fourth major attack against the air field in the Plaine des Janes last night. 
CHICAGO: Feb. 18 (Reu ters)—William M. Kunstler, one of the defense lawyers in the Chicago conspiracy trial, called for mass street demonstrations against the American legal system when he addressed a protest rally tonight. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 19—Sen ator Eugene J. McCarthy, who was a leading critic of the John son Administration's policy on Vietnam, turned his attention to the Nixon Administration today, accusing it of misleading the nation “over the issues at stake” in the war. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 19 (Reuters)—American mili tary authorities today dropped Bangkok as a vacation center for United States troops after the Thai Government had de cided not to renew the needed airline landing rights. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 19 (UPI)—Six men charged with disorderly conduct and obstructing traffic last September when they handed out antiwar literature of Students for a Democratic Society were fined $100 yester day in Chicago. Those fined in cluded Robert Roth, 19 years old, of New York; Joseph Kel ly, 24, of Mount Kisco, N. Y., and Russell Nevfeld, 22, of West Hempstead, L. I.
MOSCOW, Feb. 19 — The Soviet Union today greeted with scorn President Nixon's foreign‐policy message and lev eled particular criticism at his comments on Vietnam and the Middle East. 
Feb. 19, 1970
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 19 (AP) — United States B‐52's continued attacks against suspected North Vietnamese supply depots in eastern Laos today, but some of the bombers were diverted for strikes against targets in South Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 19 (UPI) —The Pentagon today identi fied 23 servicemen as having been killed in Vietnam, includ ing Capt. John M. Gibbons, of the Army, of Sayville, L. I. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 19 (Reuters)—American mili tary authorities today dropped Bangkok as a vacation center for United States troops after the Thai Government had de cided not to renew the needed airline landing rights. 
Despite the chaotic and partisan proceedings in the flamboyant trial of the Chicago Seven, the jury man aged to return a verdict that at least points up the basic issues. It was given precious little help from judge who often acted as though in alliance with the prosecution and from defendants who, more interested in discrediting the courts than in looking to the legal process for vindication, richly deserved contempt sen tences—though not of the severity they received. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 19 — The verdict in the Chicago con spiracy trial was described to day as a hard‐fought com promise, with three of the women jurors holding out for acquittal of all seven defend ants until a crucial conference in the Palmer House Hotel late Tuesday night. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 19— More than 150 demonstrators were arrested today as hundreds of policemen turned back a protest march on the Watergate Apartments, the home of Attor ney General John N. Mitchell and several other Cabinet members. 
Nassau County Executive Eugene H. Nickerson formally entered the battle for the Dem Ocratic nomination for Gov ernor yesterday with a wide ranging attack on Governor Rockefeller and a declaration that he would seek a Negro running mate for Lieutenant Governor. 
HONG KONG, Friday, Feb. 20 (AP)—The Hanoi radio said to day that President Nixon's foreign‐policy statement showed that his Administration wanted to win the war in Vietnam through force rather than ne gotiation. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 19 (Reuters)—Capt. Thomas Will ingham, accused in a second alleged massacre of Viet namese civilians two years ago, will testify before an Army board of inquiry tomorrow, the Defense Department disclosed today. 
PARIS, Feb. 19 — The Unit ed States tried a new approach today to get the deadlocked Vietnam peace talks into the negotiating stage but said later that it had not worked. 
Federal Judge Julius Hoffman brought down the curtain on the dismal Chicago conspiracy trial with sentences which can only be explained as an act of personal vindictiveness. The imposition of maximum penalties of five years' imprisonment and $5,000 fines plus payment of the cost of prosecution—combined with an order that the defendants remain in jail until all costs and fines have been paid—is an assault on every civilized concept of justice. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20 — More than three dozen Con gressmen, former military offi cers, professors and other war critics met today to discuss American involvement in Viet nam in a two‐day conference on war and national responsibil ity. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20 (AP) —The United States has for mally apologized to the Cam bodian Government and has provided payments totaling $11,400 for 35 persons killed or wounded last Nov. 16–17 in air strikes directed at Vietcong positions in Cambodia, the State Department reported to day. 
MONTGOMERY Ala., Feb. 20 —First Lieut., William L. Calley Jr., who is awaiting court‐mar tial on charges of murdering 102 South Vietnamese civilians, conferred for an hour today with former Gov. George C. Wallace and won a measure of sympathy. 
As Commander of United Nations forces in Korea, I signed the Armistice on July 27, 1953, which terminated the fighting. After the signing cere mony I said: 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Saturday, Feb. 21—Tanks and about 6,000 North Vietnamese soldiers seized the Plaine des Jarres air strip early today and by mid day controlled nearly all of the strategic plain, official sources said. 
LONDON, Feb. 20—In this country, courts are treated as temples of order and tradition, detached from the noise of life. The notion of using them as a forum for social protest would be utterly unacceptable. Some Welsh students who tried a rather tepid demonstration in a courtroom the other day found themselves in jail before the day ended. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 20—The five men convicted Wednesday in the Chicago conspiracy trial were each sentenced today to five years in prison. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Feb. 21 (AP)—American troops clashed with North Viet namese forces for the second time in eight days in the Que son Valley area south of Da nang, the United States com mand said today. It reported that four Americans had been killed and 28 wounded. 
OSLO, Norway, Feb. 20 (AP) —Norway decided today to con tribute $140,000 for aid in North and South Vietnam. The Foreign Ministry announced that the money had been put at the disposal of the Inter national Red Cross Committee. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 20 — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that the Soviet missile build‐up, if it continued at its current pace, could place the United States “in a second‐ rate strategic position” by the middle of this decade. 
GENEVA, Feb. 20 — The World Council of Churches called on the United States today to refrain from methods of warfare in South Vietnam, “which by long‐term damage to the soil and vegetation further endanger the life of human beings!” 
MINNEAPOLIS, Feb. 21 (AP) —A group of professors and students from colleges in this area has purchased 39 shares of Honeywell, Inc., to further a protest against that company's manufacture of weapons used in Vietnam. The stock was bought Wednesday so that 39 representatives of the group, which calls itself the Honey well Project, could attend the company's annual meeting April 28. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 21 — City policemen arrested 112 young demonstrators here this afternoon for “disorderly con duct” and refusing to disperse after two hours of speeches and a loosely organized march against the sentencing of the Chicago conspiracy defendants. 
TROY, N. Y., Feb. 21 (UPI)— Robert P. Reeves, who will be barely old enough to make the race, said that he will campaign for the G.O.P. Senatorial nom ination in all of New York State's 62 counties. 
Former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey last night termed “deplorable” the criminal con tempt sentencing of the Chica go conspiracy trial defendants and their lawyers. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 21 (AP)—A United States Navy helicopter crashed at sea while attempting a landing aboard the carrier Constella tion off Vietnam, the Navy reported today. One of the 11 men aboard was lost. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 21 — More than 5,000 demonstrators gathered outside the Federal Building here today to protest the convictions in the Chicago conspiracy trial, then rallied in front of the Cook County Jail where the seven defendants are imprisoned.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 21 — New information in the hands of the Nixon Administration shows that the rate of enemy infiltration in South Vietnam in January and so far on February was considerably below that of the same period of last year and that the rate this month) was even lower than that of last month. 
CHICAGO — Before the trial of the Chicago 7 ended last week with the conviction of the Out of State 5, Judge Julius Hoff man left no doubt that he un derstood the offense vaguely called “contempt of court” as including disdainful attitudes to ward his court “and our judicial system.” Interpreted literally — and Judge Hoffman's interpre tation is not without precedent — contempt of court takes on the peculiar character of out lawing a state of mind. 
Israeli Rebuts Charges
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 21—A North Vietnamese force hiding in hedgerows has am bushed a United States ar mored unit south of Danang, killing more Americans than in any single previous battle this year, military spokesmen said today.
WITH those words, spoken in mid‐November, Richard Mil hous Nixon automatically— if perhaps not consciously — estab lished a major test for himself, one almost as significant as that pre sented by his Vietnam policy. He snake to an unconvinced society.
THE normal attitude of the Amer ican public toward military justice is compounded of equal parts of indifference and ignorance. In what used to be normal times, this was natural enough. Before World War II, the peacetime military establishment was small and com posed entirely of regulars—a caste that tended to be distinct from the rest of the population. Its officers came from West Point or Annapolis, married the daughters of other regu lars and sent their sons to West Point or Annapolis. Enlisted men got drunk on payday and drunker at the expira tion of every hitch, after which they staggered back to the post and re enlisted. When they landed in the brig or guardhouse, which was fre quently, the civilian public cared about the fairness of the proceedings no more than it cared about the system of criminal justice applicable to other foreigners, such as Chinese coolies. Neither the Supreme Court nor anyone else ever supposed that the Bill of Rights applied to soldiers. Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase said in 1867 that “the power of Congress in the government of the land and naval forces ... is not at all affected by the Fifth or any other amend ment,” and the proposition was scarcely challenged until after World War II.
A scientist at the laboratory that did the study showing that a vast “dead sea” was result ing from the offshore dumping of sewage sludge said yester day that the only way to find out what to do about the waste was to try dumping it in a new area so that its action on the environment could be studied from the beginning. 
FORT BENNING, Ga.—Abou?? 200 soldiers, including 30 ready be shipped off to Vietnam watched attentively the other day as an Army team showe?? how to search a village with out slaughtering the noncom batants.
“IT'S been a revolution since the first time,” said Adlai Steven son III, gazing somberly out the car window at the frozen corn fields of rural Illinois. “Everything has changed, even the food. Catfish —we used to have good catfish every night in the river‐bottom towns. And turtle and oysters down in southern Illinois.” Stevenson was 
One of the features absent from the standard “intrigue” novel is extended political com mentary—especially, commen tary about our engagement in Vietnam. It is present in abun dance in THE DEFECTOR (Harper & Row, $6.95) by Charles Collingwood, and it constitutes the chief strength of his novel.
NEW HAVEN, Feb. 21 — About 30 youths were arrested today during a demonstration in support of the seven defend ants in the Chicago conspiracy trial. 
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee may have been con fused by last week's testimony on Operation Phoenix. The com mittee had a report from the American military command in Saigon that seemed to give Phoenix the credit for hunting down and killing 6,187 Vietcong political cadres last year. Then it heard William E. Colby, the pacification chief in Vietnam, emphatically deny that Phoenix was an “assassination” program.
Here is a delicious sliver of whimsy hovering somewhere between A. A. Milne and Mack Sennett, if you can imagine such a phenomenon. Miss Tonks's characters are a covey of English (and one Ameri can) vacationing on an Italian island, who carry on about sex in the tone of Christopher Robin chatting up Winnie The Pooh. The effect is not in sipid, as one might fear, but disarming and joyful.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 20 — South Vietnam's de fense officials are planning a major shift of village‐based professional soldiers into con tested areas, leaving the de fense of villages considered rel atively secure to unpaid local militiamen and police.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 22 —The Thai Government an nounced today that rest and recreation flights for American troops from Saigon to Bangkok, suspended late last week after a Thai official notified Pan American Airways that landing rights would not be renewed, would be resumed within 10 days.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 22 (AP) — The United States command reported today that three Americans had been killed and 22 wounded in four enemy attacks ranging from 35 miles north‐northwest of Saigon to 44 miles south of Danang.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 22 (AP) — Senator John C. Stennis, Democrat of Mississippi, sug gested today a constitutional amendment to eliminate the right of trial in some cases, such as the recent Chicago con spiracy trial.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 22 (UPI) — A twice‐wounded and decorated soldier whose rifle was stolen in Vietnam was not only made to pay for it but was overcharged $60, Representative Lionel Van Deerlin, Democrat of California, said today.
MADISON, N. J., Feb. 22 (UPI) — Senator Strom Thur mond, Democrat of South Caro lina, was pelted with marshmal lows by a group of hecklers as he defended Judge Julius Hoff man of the Chicago conspiracy trial, at a speech given here to day at Drew University.
CARBONDALE, Ill., Feb. 22 —Southern Illinois University at first glance seems a most unlikely magnet for antiwar militants.
Fate has presented President Nixon with a magnificent op portunity. With a stroke of the pen he can defuse the student revolt, pre‐empt the most ef fective arguments of the New Left and destroy the plausibility of charges of proto‐fascism now openly leveled at his Ad ministration.
Two parades—one of devo tion and one of dissent— marked the observance of George Washington's Birthday here yesterday.
The rout of Laotian forces, strongly supported by American airpower, in the Plaine des Jarres poses a serious test for the Nixon Doctrine of limited United States overseas involvement. It lends urgency to Con gressional efforts to define the limits of the American commitment in that small but strategic state on the borders of Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23—Tran Ngoc Chau, the Op position deputy accused by President Nguyen Van Thieu of pro‐Communist activities, made a surprise appearance this morning at the National As sembly and announced he would stage a sit‐in there un til his trial ended.
ATLANTA, Feb. 23 (AP) — The American Bar Association rejected a plea from the Nixon Administration today and re affirmed, by a margin of four votes, its opposition to a 21‐ year‐old treaty banning geno cide.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 23 (AP)—United States B 52's dropped 1,500 tons of bombs on the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos today, informed sources said.
BAVET, Cambodia, Feb. 21 — The war in neighboring South Vietnam spills over into this neutral country in a va riety of ways, some deadly, most corrupting.
ON THE 17TH PARALLEL, North Vietnam, Feb. 24 (AP)— A somber portion of the 17th parallel, the line dividing North and South Vietnam, is now on view.
CHICAGO, Feb. 24—Ramsey Clark, the former Attoney Gen eral of the United States, has signed a “friend of the court” brief urging that the defendants and lawyers in the Chicago conspiracy trial be released on anneal bonds.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 24— Senator Edward M. Kennedy said today that the military budget described by the Ad ministration as “rock‐bottom” could be substantially cut with out any danger to the nation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 24 (AP) — Informed sources said today that North Viet nam had launched the biggest supply operation of the war down the Ho Chi Minh Trail in eastern Laos.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 24 (UPI) ‐The Defense Department to day listed the names of the following Army men from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Feb. 25 — Tran Ngoc Chau, an Opposition Deputy, was found guilty today in absentia of having damaged the national security of South Vietnam through having had dealings with his brother, a North Vietnamese intelligence agent. Mr. Chau was sentenced by a military court to 20 years at hard labor.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 — Congress courteously wel comed President Pompidou today and applauded him as addressed a joint meeting. The French leader here with his wife on an eight‐day state visit, touched briefly but pointedly on the problems of Vietnam and the Middle East, the principal points of policy divergence between Paris and Washington.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 25 (Reuters)—A $3‐million base at Laikhe near Saigon was handed over today to the South Vietnamese by the First Infan try Division, scheduled to leave by April 15.
MOSCOW, Feb, 25—Official Soviet sources said today that they shared President Nixon's hope for improved Soviet American relations but took strong exception to his criti cism of Moscow's policy in the Middle East and Vietnam. 
Taking his cue from the Convention on Genocide, a Yale biologist has proposed a new international agreement to ban “Ecocide”—the willful destruction of the environment. 
CHICAGO, Feb. 25 — The Government urged the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit today not to grant bail to the defendants and the two attorneys in the Chi cago conspiracy trial. 
SANTA BARBARA, Calif., Feb. 25 (AP)—Young demon strators set fire to a branch of the Bank of America and to a police sedan tonight in the second night of street distur bances near the University of California's Santa Barbara campus. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25—Fol lowing is the text of President Pompidou's address delivered today before a joint meeting of Congress. The translation was read by his official inter preter, Constantin Andronikof. 
Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman of Thailand said yes terday that Asian countries should develop their regional security without relying on United States troops. He said that collectively the Asian na tions might be successful in dealing with Communist China and ultimately winning its co operation.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25— Criticism of the Administra tion's Laotian policy broke out in the Senate today as Sena tor Charles McC. Mathias Jr., a freshman Republican from Maryland, charged that the Executive branch was subvert ing the will of Congress by the American military, involve ment in Laos. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 (UPI) —Senator George S. McGovern said today that Democrats must develop a “coalition of con science and responsibility” to offset the “public relations” of President Nixon. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 25 (UPI) —Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr., the Army's second in command in Vietnam at the time of the alleged Songmy massacre, tes tified for 40 minutes today be fore a special Army board investigating the incident. 
In denying bail to the defendants in Chicago pending appeal, Judge Julius Hoffman has continued to act in character as a man engaged in a personal vendetta. Fortunately, the case can now be expected to move speedily into more objectively judicious hands so that the defendants' rights will be assured full protection. 
WASHINGTON, Feb. 26 (UPI) — Vice President Agnew told the nation's Governors today that the defendants in the conspiracy trial of the Chi cago Seven were a “handful of oddballs [who] deliberately set out to disrupt the most basic protection of our coun try, the dignity of the courts.”
SANTA BARBARA, Calif., Feb. 26 — Defying a curfew, heavy police patrols and a declaration of “extreme emer gency” by Gov. Ronald Reagan, hundreds of youths pelted po lice cars with rocks and clashed with policemen tonight on the outskirts of this university com munity.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 26 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day issued the names of the following Army men from the New York area as having been killed in Vietnam: MARTIN, Dennis P., Pfc., Swedes boro, N. J. PALLADINO, Thomas A., Pfc., East Patchogue, L. J.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 26—Five United States ma rines have been arrested and charged with murdering 11 South Vietnamese women and 5 children on Feb. 19, the Marine Corps command an nounced today.
PARIS, Feb. 26 — The Viet cong delegation to the peace talks indicated today that its chief representative, Mrs. Ngu yen Thi Birth, had decided to join the chief North Vietna mese delegate in boycotting the sessions.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 26—National policemen seized Representative Tran Ngoc Chau in his sanctuary in the National Assembly to day and dragged him strug gling out of the rear gate to begin a 20‐year prison sen tence on charges of pro‐ Communist activity. The po lice raid, watched by hun dreds of South Vietnamese spectators who had been expecting it, ended a four day sit‐in in the National As sembly by the 46‐year‐old deputy, who accused President Nguyen Van Thieu of having acted unconstitutionally to bring his prosecution.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 26—In his definitive foreign policy speech of last Nov. 3, President Nixon said: “I believe that one of the reasons for the deep division about Vietnam is that many Americans have lost con fidence in what the Govern ment has told them about our policy. The American people cannot and should not be asked to support a policy which in volves the overriding issues of war and peace unless they know the truth about that policy.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 26 (AP) — The United States Command's weekly casualty report today said 83 Americans were killed in action last week and 657 were wounded. The week before, 96 dead and 589 wounded were reported.
It is hard to speak of the Chicago trial with anything but bitterness.
CHICAGO, Feb. 27 (UPI)— The nation's young people are being lost to a “freaking fag revolution,” the chief prosecu tor in the trial of the Chicago says.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 27 (Reuters) — Three Un ited States Ambassadors from Southeast Asia wound up a two‐day meeting here today, a United States Embassy spokes man said.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 27 (UPI) —The Defense Department an nounced today that Specialist 4 William A. Aldag, of Hicksville, L. I., had been killed in action in Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Feb. 27 (UPI) — The Govern ment today granted a new trial to Tran Ngoc Chau, a 46‐ year‐old member of South Vietnam's National Assembly who was sentenced Wednesday to 20 years in prison for al leged Communist activity.
ISLA VISTA, Calif., Feb. 27 —Order prevailed today in this university community where youths and the po lice have battled with stones and tear gas for the last three nights.
PHOENIX, Ariz., Feb. 27 (UPI) — Vice President Agnew said tonight that the “out rageous courtroom conduct” of the Chicago “totally obfuscated the constitutional question” of tthe Federal antiriot law.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Feb. 27—The scene of the al leged killing of five Vietnamese women and 11 children by five United States marines is an area fought for longer than any other in South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Feb. 28 (AP)—Vietcong guerrillas and South Vietnam ese troops exchanged gunfire today in Saigon and terrorists set off two bombs in the city, military spokesmen reported.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31—A North Vietnamese film of Amer ican prisoners of war attending a Christmas church service was shown here today.
To the Editor: It seems to me that the McGovern‐Hatfield approach to getting the United States out of Vietnam is doomed to fail ure due to President Nixon's success in convincing the ma jority of the American pepole that he is ending the war in the only manner consistent with American standards of honor. [Editorial Aug. 31.]
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Aug. 31—President Nixon sought to dissociate himself today from a suggestion put forth by one of his senior officials that the United States is prepared to join the Soyiet Union in a peace‐keeping force in the Mid dle East if the crisis there is settled.
NHATRANG, South Vietnam Aug. 31 (AP) — A four‐day armed siege of a South Viet namese military hospital by a Vietnam Army doctor accused of killing a hospital adminis trator ended today when four armored vehicles blasted their way into the hospital com pound.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31— The Senate lumbered through five hours of debate today on its “amendment to end the war,” preparing to vote on it tomorrow and then go home for a week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 31 — Anti‐Government Buddhists appeared today to have won 10 of the 30 Senate seats contested in yesterday's election.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 31 (Reuters)—War activity in South Vietnam fell off today after a surge yesterday coin ciding with the voting for 30 senators.
LOS ANGELES, Aug. 31 — Angry leaders of the Mexican‐ American community called for a Federal investigation today into the death Saturday of Ruben Salazar, a columnist for The Los Angeles Times and news director for a Spanish language television station.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31— The president of the American Sociological Association, Dr. Reinhard Bendix of the Univer sity of California, criticized politicians and protesters alike today for turning the nation's universities into “convenient battlegrounds.”
COLUMBUS. Ohio, Aug. 31 (UPI) — Such big‐name enter tainers as Bob Hope, Art Link litter and George Jesse! are “unacceptable” to most of the United States troops now over was, according to a Govern ment official who books the acts.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31 —Senator J. W. Fulbright said today that the Paris peace talks were deadlocked because the Nixon Administration was unwilling to make the “key concessions” necessary to break the stalemate.
GENEVA, Aug. 31 — Marcel Naville, president of the Inter national Committee of the Red Cross, criticized both North and South Vietnam today for theft attitude toward Red Cross in‐ spection of their prison camns.
PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 31 — Lines of men in American Legion caps marched jauntily through the downtown streets here today, symbolizing the temporary victory of “the sys tem” over political radicals, who had threatened disruption.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 31—A young marine from West Baby lon, who declared in Stock holm last week that he was a defector, was returned to New York today, the Defense Department announced.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 1—South Vietnamese troops, reinforced by Ameri cans, reported having killed 56 Vietcong soldiers yesterday in a battle lasting nearly eight hours, 120 miles east‐northeast of Saigon.
The Nixon Administration will make a colossal mistake if it interprets the Senate's rejection of the Hatfield McGovern amendment as an invitation to slow down American troop withdrawals from Vietnam or to stonewall the peace talks in Paris. The fact that 39 Senators were sufficiently concerned over the erratic course of Administration pronouncements on Vietnam to favor a legislated timetable for withdrawal should be evidence enough of the impatience felt by many Americans at the lag in progress toward a negotiated peace.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 1—Five helicopters flut tered into a jungle clearing northwest of Saigon several months ago to pick up a pla toon of American infantrymen that had been staging ambushes for 10 days.
SAIGON, Sept. 1—Dr. Vu Van Mau, a Buddhist law pro fessor who headed a victori ous 10‐man antiwar slate in elections for the Senate, re calls having shared top scho lastic honors in his Hanoi lycee with another outstand ing student—Vo Nguyen Giap now commander of the North Vietnamese forces. General Giap was two years behind Dr. Mau at the Lycee Albert Sarraut, where the brightest Vietnam ese boys formed an intellec tual elite in the twenties and thirties. “He was a very bril liant student,” Dr. Mau said of his schoolmate. “Every three months the first student of each class was congratu lated. Giap and I were always meeting on such occasions.” Man in the news
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 1—David Miller, man ager of the Columbia Broad casting System bureau here, married Kate Dilworth of Washington in a civil cere mony today.
James L. Buckley, Conserva tive party candidate for United States Senator, described his two opponents yesterday as “white flag” candidates for supporting a Congressional ef fort to require the withdrawal of all American troops from Indochina by the end of next year.
PORTLAND, Ore., Sept. 1— About 1,000 young people marched through Portland's streets tonight in the second licensed parade by the People's Army Jamboree in three days. The parade, which disrupted the flow of homebound traffic from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M., was held as a protest against racism.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 1—The Senate defeated today the Hat field‐McGovern “amendment to end the war.”
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Sept. 1—Vice President Agnew said here today that the Cam bodian Government “has at least a fighting chance for sur vival” as a result of the United States and South Vietnamese assault on Communist border sanctuaries.
Wounding other people's sensibilities never has given George Meany much pause so it is no surprise to find the 76‐year‐old president of the A.F.L.‐C.I.O. celebrating the advent of Labor Day with a hatful of harsh words for practically everybody outside labor's own ranks.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 1 — Early in May, aflame over the allied drive into Cambodia and the deaths at Kent State Univer sity, a group of young political activists banded together to lobby for the “amendment to end the war.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 1— Fourteen Senators, including the Democratic and Repub lican leaders, urged President Nixon today to propose a comprehensive standstill cease‐fire for South Vietnam at the stalemated peace talks in Paris.
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., ept. 2 (UPI)—The Army said today that resumption of the preliminary courts‐martial pro ceedings for Specialist 4 Robert V. T'Souvas of San Jose, Calif, in the alleged Songmy ??? had been set back a week until Sept. 28. Specialist Souvas is charged with two ??? of murder. No reason was given for the one‐week ???.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 2 (UPI) — The United States today transferred control of an Army company of 31 UH 1 helicopters to South Viet nam's Air Force and turned over responsibility for coastal patrols to the South Vietna mese Navy.
Theodore Kheel, the New York City labor negotiator, is going to Paris today to try to find out if his experience as a professional mediator can be useful in helping the Paris peace talks.
HONG KONG, Thursday. Sept. 3—Premier Chou En‐lai of Communist China last night accused the United States of trying to end the fighting in Indochina by “feverishly prac ticing political deception and contriving peace‐talk schemes.”
PORTLAND, Ore., Sept. 2— The American Legion's national convention urged Congress to day to propose constitutional amendments limiting the author ity of the Supreme Court.
SAIGON, Thursday, Sept. 3 —Three Americans were killed and 14 wounded In the fiery explosion of a Marine Corps Phantom jet fighter‐bomber at Danang air base, the United States command said today.
KNOXVILLE, Tenn., Sept. 2 —Two young men who were charged with disorderly con duct for using profanity during the Billy Graham service at which President Nixon spoke at the University of Tennessee in May were sentenced today to 20 days in the workhouse. City Judge Jesse Butler denied mo tions for dismissal of the charges against Charles Conrad Browne and Terry Reynolds.
PARIS, Sept. 2— A recom mendation by 14 United States Senators for a cease‐fire was virtually ruled out today by Xuan Thuy, head of the North Vietnamese delegation at the peace talks.
TRUNGTHANH, Sputh Viet nam, Aug. 28—The Street With out Joy is still not much fun, but at least it has begun to stir with village life again.
To the Editor: It is long past the time to register dismay, anger, utter dis enchantment and moral revul sion toward the conscious choice of violent techniques and violence itself by extremists on college campuses. [Editorial Aug. 25.]
HANOI, North Vietnam, Sept. 3 (Agence France‐Presse)—An 11‐member delegation from the Black Panthers and the Ameri can pacifist movement left here today for Peking and Algeria with 379 letters from United States prisoners of war in North Vietnam.
PARIS, Sept. 3—North Viet nam's chief negotiator, Xuan Thuy, ended his nine‐month boycott of the Paris peace talks today. But he declared that the United States position had not changed in that time, and he made it plain that the Commu nist bargaining position had not changed either.
SYDNEY, Australia, Sept. 3 —The Government has refused a visa to a New York clergy man, the Rev. James R. Mc Graw, who was to have ac companied Dick Gregory, the comedian, to Australia to take part in anti‐Vietnam rallies at colleges later this month.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 3 (AP)—A leader of an Ameri can young people's group tour ing South Vietnam said today that its members were astound ed by the difference between the country's image in the press and the “reality of what we found here.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 3 (AP)—Sixty‐three Amer icans were killed in action last week in Vietnam, the United States command announced to day, but the total did not include 28 others killed when a helicopter was shot down last Wednesday.
HARTFORD, Sept. 3 (UPI)— The Rev. Joseph D. Duffey, Democratic candidate for the Senate who is an outspoken op ponent of the Vietnam war, criticized the antiwar move ment today for ignoring other issues and alienating “working men.”
SYDNEY, Australia, Sept. 3— William McMahon, Minister for External Affairs, said in Parlia ment today that an article in The New York Times asserting that Australian troops in South Vietnam are mercenaries whose costs are paid by the United States was scurrilous and in accurate.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Sept. 3 (AP)—A United States Marine lieutenant from Los Gatos, Calif., was acquitted today of a charge of having negligently killed a Vietnamese woman with a sniper rifle.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 3 (UPI) —The Defense Department an nounced today that Pfc. Robert W. Ortiz of the Army, from Paterson, N. J., had been killed in action in Vietnam.
RICHMOND, Sept. 3 (UPI)— The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit said today that the Army could forbid antiwar meetings and publications on military posts to preserve discipline and morale. A three‐judge panel up held a ruling that the command ing general at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, did not violate First Amendment rights.
PORTLAND, Ore., Sept. 3— Alfred T. Chamie, a Los An geles lawyer, was elected na tional commander of the Amer ican Legion today in the final session of a four‐day conven tion.
SYDNEY, Australia, Sept. 3 —The Government has refused a visa to a New York clergy man, the Rev. James R. Mc Graw, who was to have ac companied Dick Gregory, the comedian, to Australia to take part in anti‐Vietnam rallies at colleges later this month. The Minister for Immigration, Phillip Lynch, said that Mr. Gregory had earlier been denied a visa on grounds that his in tended activities here were understood to be of a nature “inimical to the object for which Australian troops are fighting in Vietnam.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Friday, Sept. 4 (AP)—Forty disabled South Vietnamese war veterans were barricaded in a Government‐owned apartment house today after exchanging gunfire with policemen and soldiers in their campaign for improved benefits from the Government.
An experimental group of neutral observers has been or ganized by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York in an effort to reduce vio lence at mass demonstrations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 3 (UPI)—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky will visit the United States soon to address a rally on behalf of President Nixon's policy in Vietnam. A spokesman said Mr. Ky had ac cepted an invitation to address a Parade for Victory rally in Washington. The date of his trip has not yet been set.
EAST LOS ANGELES, Calif., Sept. 3—Earlier this week, hun dreds of Mexican‐American youths jammed into a swelter ing news conference where community leaders were com menting on the riot that rocked East Los Angeles last Satur day.
The standstill cease‐fire proposal for Vietnam urged on President Nixon by fourteen Senators—including prominent “hawks” and “doves” of both parties—is far more than a scheme for a military truce. Its im portance lies precisely in that it addresses the cen tral issue in the war and in the Paris negotiations, the political issue of who is to govern South Vietnam.
BERNARDSVILLE, N. J., Sept. 4—More than 100 veter ans and reservists in battle dress began a march today through western New Jersey toward a Labor Day peace rally in Valley Forge, Pa., where they will demand an immediate United States withdrawal from South Vietnam.
There is probably no legal or constitutional reason why Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky should not come to the United States next month to participate in the Rev. Carl McIntire's “March for Victory” in Wash ington. But that does not keep the projected visit South Vietnam's Number Two from being objection able on grounds of taste, propriety and judgment.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 4 (UPI) — One thousand South Vietnamese rangers moved across the Cambodian border today against Commu nist forces in the so‐called Fish hook area, military spokesmen reported. They said the action took place 52 miles west of Saigon and involved two bat talions.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 4 (UPI) The South Vietnamese Em bassy is understood to have advised Saigon that a visit to Washington next month by Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky to address a “march‐for‐victory” rally would not be wise.
The National Broadcasting Company broadcast an uncon firmed report yesterday that its correspondent Welles Harigen, captured in Cambodia on May 31, had been killed by the North Vietnamese.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 4—The Army dismissed a murder charge today against a 23‐year‐ old corporal accused in the al leged massacre of South Viet namese at Songmy village on grounds of “insufficient evi dence.”
SYRACUSE, Sept. 4—Senator) Charles E. Goodell vigorously defended his credentials as a Republican during a visit to day to this city, where many of his fellow Republicans op pose his bid to return to the Senate.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 4 (UPI)—South Vietnam's top policeman warned disabled vet erans in a tough 10‐minute television speech tonight that they could be killed or sen tenced to death if they con tinued to “attack, resist or in terfere with” the police or the military.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Sept. 4 (AP)—Herman Nicker son, Jr., a retired marine gen eral from Lincolnville, Me., and a Vietnam veteran, was nomi nated today by President Nixon as head of the National Credit Union Administration. The new independent agency is respon sible for supervision and regula tion of the 12,689 federally Chartered credit unions with assets of more than $14 billion.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Sept. 5 (UPI)—The man who is to become Prime Minister this month called today for the withdrawal of all United States troops from South Vietnam. This represents a major change in Malaysian foreign policy.
“I do not know whether we can endure another four‐year term in the Presidency. I use the word ‘endure’ in Webster's own meaning, to last, remain, continue in the same state without perishing. I face the prospect of another campaign like an open‐end stay in a concentration camp.” Thus did Mrs. Lyndon Baines Jonnson express in March, 1967, her feelings about her husband making another try for the White House in 1968. Her anguish was to continue until the President announced his decision to retire on the night of March 31, 1968.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept., 5— Communist forces attacked the already devastated town of Saang for the second straight night last evening, the Cambodi an Army command reported today.
TODAY‐SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 6
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 5 (UPI)—South Viet namese policemen tore down the shanties of 300 refugee families and arrested the wives and children of some disabled South Vietnamese Army veterans, authorities reported today.
FLEMINGTON, N.J., Sept. 5 — Expressing bitterness over the opposition they have en countered, more than 100 road weary veterans continued their antiwar march through western New Jersey today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 5—The opera “Hansel and Gretel” will bring a large if controversial dose of culture to Saigon this weekend when it is performed under private Amer ican auspices — at a cost of nearly $71100.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 5—The summer is over and the first major political test of the Nixon Administration is coming up in the Congressional election. This should bring the country back to the gigantic ordeals and menaces of the war, crime, in flation and unemployment.
NHATRANG, South Vietnam, Sept. 5 (UPI)——Moi Pi! Moi Pi!” the marching recruits chant the cadence, and their Viet namese instructors exchange the tolerant smiles that profes sional soldiers the world over have for amateurs trying to learn their craft.
SAIGON—All week long, Viet namese strolling along the clogged streets of downtown Sai gon have been looking up at huge billboard rising on a small patch of green. At infrequent in tervals, some member of the of ficial bureaucracy arrived to up date the results of last Sunday's elections for 30 Senatorial seats, half the Senate.
SAIGON. ASIDE from being an ungainly word, “Vietnamization,” re peated here, can sound some thing like an Insult. What does it mean,‐ this turning of the War over to the Smith Vietnamese? With 100,000 Vietnamese soldiers dead, cities razed, crops destroyed, whole villages obliterated, the Americans can talk about insisting that this country bear the brunt of the war? Vietnamization becomes an other catchword, like “strategic ham let,” “pacification,” “revolutionary development”—phrases that‐ rang re assuringly in Washington and never mind how they jarred the people who live here.
SAIGON, South Vietnam\Sept. 5—With fighting at a low level, high‐ranking Amer icans here are standing by early assessments that the al lied thrust into Cambodia se verely weakened North Viet nam's ability to wage any thing more than token war fare in the southern half of South Vietnam for the rest of this year.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 5 (AP)—The United States Embassy's weekly bulletin is running a contest for a name for the embassy's new pleas ure boat.
LUSAKA, Zambia, Sept. 5 (Agence France‐Presse)—‐A se ries of informal meetings was under way here today as dele gates to a conference of non aligned nations worked to set tle delicate procedural prob lems before the nations’ foreign ministers meet here tomorrow.
WASHINGTON — After hun dreds of speeches and months of often bitter argument, the Senate rejected the Hatfield‐Mc Govern “Amendment to End the War” last week and brought to an end the long hot summer of Congressional debate over the Adm'nistration's Indochina pol icy.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 6—Pressure mounted to day on Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky to cancel his appear ance next month before a pro war rally in Washington.
The surprising victory of a militant Buddhist slate, which came in first in the Senate elections, brings South Vietnam's chief neutralist, antiwar, anti‐Gov ernment faction back into the country's established political system. It provides President Thieu with a new option, even if he is unlikely to employ it im mediately, for broadening his Government and intro ducing added flexibility into negotiations with the Communists to end the war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 6 (Reuters)— Three squadrons of Marine Corps jet bombers in South Vietnam will be sent back to the United States later this month, the United States command an nounced today. The move in volves 33 jets and about 1,130 men.
MONTGOMERYVILLE, Pa., Sept. 6— Weary but in good spirits, more than 100 veterans of‐the war in Vietnam marched through here this afternoon, ty ing up holiday weekend traffic asr they neared the end of an 80‐mile antiwar trek to Valley Forge.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 6—All of a sudden the politicians have rediscovered the working man, with his worries about, crime, his fear of unemploy ment and his revulsion at stu dent dissent.
LUSAKA, Zambia— The ministerial meeting of non aligned nations opened here today with its principal atten tion directed to three regions: the Middle East, Southeast Asia and southern Africa.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 7— Following are the votes of delegations from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut on the major roll‐calls in Congress during the week ending Sept. 4.
TOKYO, Sept. 7 (AP)‐‐Com munist‐led forces in Indochina now seem to be trying to de velop the strength to make “major effort” in Cambodia, Gen. William C. Westmoreland said today.
LUSAKA, Tuesday, Sept. 8 (Agency France‐Presse) — For eign Ministers attending the preparatory meeting here for the meeting of chiefs of state of nonaligned nations voted early today to admit delegates from the Vietcong's provisional revolutionary government of South Vietnam to the confer ence as observers.
VALLEY FORGE. Pa. Sept. 7 —Chanting “What do you want?” and answering “Peace now,” more than 100 veterans of the war in Vietnam arrived here today after a four‐day march and led 1,500 other peo ple in demanding an immediate American military withdrawal from South Vietnam.
QUINHON, South Vietnam, Sapt., 5—A United States Army signal unit, installed for more than two years at the base of two ancient tem ples, hurriedly evacuated its hilltop position today after Oen. Creighton W. Abrams reportedly expressed concern over possible desecration of the monuments.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 7 (UPI) —Mrs. John N. Mitchell, who first denounced Senator J. W. Fulbright for his opposition to a Supreme Court nominee, G. Harrold Carswell criticized him again today for his opposition to the Vietnam war.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 7 (Reuters) — The Cambodian Army was reported today to have begun its first major of fensive against the Commu nist troops by driving north along Route 6 from Skoun, 45 miles north of Pnompenh.
PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 7 — The Black Panther party and members of the Women's and Gay Liberation Movements ended today their weekend meeting to rewrite the United States Constitution. They will reconvene in Washington Nov. 4 to ratify their document.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 7— President Nixon received nearly 75 labor leaders and their wives at the White House tonight for dinner, a round of friendly toasts and a torchlit military pageant on the South Lawn. In 89 years of Labor Day observ ances, it was the most elabo rate holiday gesture that a President had made toward labor.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 7 (AP)—With fighting at a slow pace, United States troop withdrawals from South Viet nam moved ahead today, with American manpower reportedly falling below 400,000 for the first time since early 1967.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Sept. 8 (AP)—The commander of the First Armored Division today dismissed one charge of assault to murder against S. Sgt. David Mitchell in connection with the alleged massacre at Songmy, South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 8 (AP)—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky is reconsidering his scheduled trip to the United States next month, a Govern ment spokesman said today.
PITTSBURGH, Sept. 8 (UPI) —The Pittsburgh Steelers said today a war wound suffered in Vietnam by Rock Bleier, a run ning back, was not healing properly and more medical treatment would be needed.
LUSAKA, Zambia, Sept. 8— President Kenneth D. Kaunda of Zambia called on nonaligned nations today to establish new means for collective political and economic action in a world that he said was dominated by the big powers.
ROCHESTER, Sept 8— James L. Buckley, Conservative party candidate for the United States Senate, appealed tonight for the support of millions of New Yorkers who see Ameri can freedoms “in a state of siege.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 8—De fense Secretary Melvin R. Laird has directed the armed forces to plan to meet future emergen cies like Vietnam by calling up the reserve forces quickly rather than by relying on draftees.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 8 (AP) — More than 200 North Vietnamese commandos smashed their way into a dis trict headquarters and a ran ger camp south of Danang to day, reportedly killing 34 South Vietnamese soldiers and wounding 42. An American ad viser was also reported killed and three were injured.
To the Editor: Although the obstetrics and gynecology service at Lincoln Hospital is functioning again after more than six weeks of disruption, the events of the past month at the hospital raise some disturbing questions about the direction of our na tion in the next decade. [Edi torial Sept. 8.]
LOS ANGELES, Sept. 9 (AP) —A youth injured in an explo sion in the East Los Angeles riot Aug. 29 died today, bring ing the death toll to three. Lynn Ward, 15, years old, whom the police said had tossed a tear gas canister into a burningtrash bin, died in a Los Angeles hospital.
PNOMPENH. Cambodia, Sept. 9 — At the sports field in the center of town today, Cambo dian soldiers filled an old bus with mortar shells just arrived by way of Vietnam from the “Army Ammo Depot, Milan, Tenn.” A few feet away, recruits were running around pretending they had guns.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 9—In the latest episode of a controversy that is fasci nating and amusing the South Vietnamese, Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky today reiterated his intention to visit the United States next month despite some official American and South Vietnamese efforts to discour age him.
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Sept. 9 (UPI) — A sergeant involved in the alleged Songmy (massacre charged Gen. William C, Westmoreland today with dereliction of duty and said that the general, now the Ar my Chief of Staff, must shoul der the blame for whatever happened in the Vietnamese vil lage.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Sept. 9—President Nguyen Van Thieu briefed and entertained 537 elected city and provincial councilmen today and said he planned to give them a larger share in local government.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 9 (AP)—A senior allied commander said today that a North Vietnamese force equal to five divisions was poised for a thrust against the popu lated coastal lowlands in South Vietnam's northern provinces.
I fear that your well‐meaning but ambivalent Aug. 31 editorial “Sound Motive, Dubious Meth od” helped doom the needed Hatfield‐McGovern amendment. You are correct in quickly dis missing the Vice President's charges that its sponsors are “pacifist,” “isolationist,” and “defeatist.” Yet you leave un answered the more serious charge that passage of the amendment might have inad vertently prolonged the war by removing any incentive for Hanoi to negotiate. I also fail to see the value of a cease‐fire in Southeast Asia, in view of the difficulties experienced in the Middle East.
CASPER, Wyo., Sept. 10— Vice President Agnew, appeal ing to “the workingmen of the country” to give President Nixon a Republican Congress, lashed out today at the Demo crats as “radical liberals.”
Award. President Nixon awarded the Presidential Unit Citation for extraordi nary heroism to the Eighth Tactical Bombardment Squad ron of the Air Force. The award was made in connec tion with operations against the enemy in Southeast Asia from Nov. 15, 1968, to May 31, 1969.
After two hours of heated de bate, during which 36 City Councilmen professed opposi tion to the war in Vietnam, the Council adopted a resolution, 32‐4, directing the Corporation Counsel to test the constitu tionally of the war in behalf of any New Yorker ordered to combat duty in Southeast Asia.
LUSAKA, Zambia, Sept. 10 —The conference of the heads of state of nonaliened nations ended today after adopting resolutions supporting the Pales tine liberation movement and similar movements in South east Asia and southern Africa. The conference also called for the economic liberation of de veloping nations from the big powers. President Kenneth D. Kaun da of Zambia closed the three‐ day conference with the an nouncement that the 54 nation: meeting here had achieved “an unquestionable identity of views” despite basic differ ences.
SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 10 —United States District Judge William T. Sweigert issued to day a memorandum decision urging the Supreme Court to rule on the legality of the Viet nam war.
PARIS, Sept. 10 — Accusing each other of taking inflexible stands, participants in the Viet nam peace talks remained stale mated today at the 83d meet ing. The Vietnamese Communists again demanded the unilateral withdrawal of American troops and the ouster of the present Saigon Government before prog ress could be made at the talks here. But faint hopes were raised because of a reduction in the polemics at the three‐ hour meeting and because of a softening from last week in the position taken by the Vietcong, press spokesman on the make up of a provisional government for South Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 10 (UPI)—United States headquarters reported today that 65 Americans were killed fighting in Vietnam last week and added to the list 22 names of those killed in a helicopter crash Aug. 27. The total, 87, was the highest reported in 10 weeks.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 10—The United States Em bassy here began moving into larger quarters today in antici pation of the arrival Saturday Of the new American AmbaS sador Emory C. Swank, and a few more hands to help ad minister the increased Ameri can aid program.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 11 (AP)—Enemy troops in Cambodia were reported to day to be at the outskirts of the provincial capital of Siem reap. The town is just south of the temple ruins of Angkor, which are in the hands of the North Vietnamese and Viet cong.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 11—“Hey, honey, what is your name?” the 22‐year‐ old lieutenant asked his Vietnamese fiancée at the United States Consulate here, where they were applying for a marriage affidavit.
The city Corporation Coun sel's office was asked yesterday to start a court test of the con stitutionality of the war in Southeast Asia on behalf of two soldiers from New York City, one stationed near Saigon, South Vietnam, and the other under orders to go to Vietnam.
SAN DIEGO, Sept, II—Vice President Agnew broadened his attack on liberal politicians to day to include members of his own party.
NEW ROCHELLE, Sept. 11— United States Senator Charles E. Goodell, the Republican‐Lib eral candidate for election to a full term, quietly toured West chester County today — the home of his Democratic oppo nent, Richard L. Ottinger—and charged that Mr. Ottinger's “legislative record is paper thin.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 12—A Senate Foreign Relations sub committee disclosed today that the dispatch of 50,000 South Korean soldiers to fight in South Vietnam had cost the United States more than $1‐ billion in the last five years.
WASHINGTON—One of Rich ard Nixon's old friends noted, in the course of an informal chat with some reporters here last week, that one of the problems with the national preoccupation with Indochina was that people tended “to forget about the county jail.”
BROWNSVILLE, Tex., Sept., 12—The Most Rev. Humberto S. Medeiros sat quietly behind his desk this week, staring out a glass wall of his office toward the Fort Brown Resaca, a sort of slough of the Rio Grande, while a Boston television cam eraman finished loading into his camera.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 12—After five years of fighting in South Vietnam, the South Koreans are re‐evaluating their role and tactics.
RALEIGH, N. C.—The Fourth Congressional District of North Carolina is a region of sharp contrasts—of farms and great universities, of organized labor and organized blacks, of re bellious youths and disapprov ing adults, of partly decaying downtowns and sleek new sub urban shopping centers.
MOSCOW, Sept. 12—Georgi A. Arbatov, the head of the Soviet Union's research insti tute on the United States, says in an article published today that the Nixon Administration has failed to solve pressing domestic and foreign problems facing the country.
THE United States may well come apart at the seams unless there is a new, radical political party, but the worst way to get one at this moment is to start one.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 12—After more than week of controversy and con fusion over whether Vice Presi dent Nguyen Cao Ky would visit Washington, it became clear today that he would make the trip—unless he changed his mind.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 12 (AP)—A West Virginia state legislator who pedaled his bicycle nearly 300 miles to present a petition to the White House was turned aside at the gates according to a White House spokesman.
The original disclosures, almost ten months ago, of the massacre at Songmy sent a tremor of shock, shame and revulsion through the nation. Most Amer icans, regardless of their general attitude toward the war itself, saw the wanton, paint‐blank killing of defenseless civilians as an assault on principles for which Americans have traditionally lived and occasionally died.
To the Editor: Ghastly as the kidnapping of innocent travelers to the Jordan desert must seem to all humane persons, there is an aspect to this event that re quires special attention. We refer to the fact that the Arab “revolutionaries” [at first] al towed non‐Jewish women and Children to leave the captive planes and go to a hotel in Amman, while forcing all Jew ish women and children‐The Geneva Conference re jected Washington's terms and Washington was compelled to pledge not to disturb the ac cords, acknowledging’ its U.N. obligation to respect Vietnam's territorial integrity and inde pendence. But it had already initiated unilaterally its policy of partition and of imposing Diem upon the south. Disregarding the Conference accords, the will of the Viet namese, its own pledge and the U.N. Charter, it has persisted right up to the present in trying to disrupt Vietnam's territorial integrity and to yoke the south with unsavory, unpopular re‐gimes. The absence of enforcement powers does not exempt na tions from the obligations of international law, nor does it modify the criminal character of our war in Vietnam as juridi cally defined at Nuremberg. Moreover, the lawlessness of U.S. behavior in Indochina does not place Mr. Nixon in a posi tion to exhort Americans to respect law at home. His only course now consistent with law is to get out of Vietnam, and to leave political resolution tothe Vietnamese and the inter national community.Max GORDON New York, Aug. 1970‐Cease‐Fire Opposed To the Editor: Your Aug. 30 editorial “Talk or Talk‐Fight in Vietnam”urged that the Unite& States propose a standstill cease‐fire. A standstill cease‐fire pro posal could signal weakness. The people of South Vietnam may feel that the initiator isno longer able to carry on the struggle. Popular support could move toward the other side. Enforcement of a standstill cease‐fire would be extremely difficult, especially in the rural areas. The activities of the allied forces are relatively openand easy to see. Communist activities are well camouflaged and difficult to see. Even if military activity could be controlled, Vietcong and North Vietnamese political terror would continue as it has in cease‐fires. Themoves into allied territories by night and returns to his sanctuaries before dawn. Negotiations following the cease‐fire would be long and drawn out. The terrorist assault on South Vietnam would con‐tinue. The Government's posi tion in the South would begin to erode and its negotiating would be weakened.power CARL S. TRIMBLE East Lansing, Mich. Sept. 3, 1970 Poverty Lawyers To the Editor: We in the Office of Economic Opportunity Legal Services program currently have two urgent concerns. One is our very limited budget, which youyour Aug. 11. Millions of poor peo pie live in areas where no Legal Services lawyers are available. Even those living where projects exist arc finding it in creasingly difficult to obtainservice because the attorneys are carrying such heavy case loads. Federal funding must be increased substantially in fiscal 1971.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 12 (AP)—The pattern of the war in South Vietnam con tinued in much the same pat tern today as it has in recent weeks, with most of the action in the northern provinces and in the Mekong Delta.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 12 (UPI) — Part of a dispatch printed in The New York Times on Dec. 14, 1969, was eliminated from a transcript of Senate hearings by Defense Department censors. The transcript made public today, dealt with aliled forces in South Vietnam.
Who was responsible for the massacre in which an estimated 500 Vietnamese civilians are said to have been slaughtered by American troops in the vil lage of Songmy on March 16, 1968?
The trouble with “conventional wis dom” is that almost everyone pays homage to it but virtually no one follows it. In foreign policy the main tenet of the new conventional wis dom is that America should not be the “world's policeman.” But 25 years after World War II, Americans are still at it, acting as “watchmen on the walls of world freedom,” as John F. Kennedy put it in an address sched uled to be delivered in Dallas, on Nov. 22, 1963. Take, for example, Hanson W. Baldwin, the former New York Times military editor, in his new book “Strategy for Tomorrow.” Af ter disclaiming any need for us to impose a Pax Americana upon the world, he then totes up the balance sheet of our commitments versus our resources; the former list is stagger ing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 13—Despite the immense United States presence here, there are Vietnamese who do not need to be motivated by Americans, and who do not want to be advised, assisted or coddled by them.
ALGIERS, Sept. 13—The Black Panther party opened an “international section” today. Eldridge Cleaver, the party's minister of information, said the section would serve as “a rival to the Rogers State Department.”
WASHINGTON, Sept. 13 (AP) —A White House commission headed by Henry Cabot Lodge today reported finding deep seated weaknesses in the United Nations.
To the Editor: Over the past decade I must have signed dozens of antiwar statements and appeals, many of which have been published as full‐page ads in The Times. I would like to suggest that it is time for another “Stop the Bombing!” ad, but this time ad dressed by opponents of the Vietnam war and the American “warfare state” to those who share those objectives but have chosen to turn to more extreme strategies of action to win them.
PHOENIX, Ariz., Sept. 13— One of the nation's leading churchmen charged here today that the Rev. Carl McIntire, Fundamentalist radio preacher who is a deposed Presbyterian minister, had been damaging national unity and “sowing dis sension” within Protestantism for 35 years.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 14—A Government min ister jumped from his car and walked into a restaurant in downtown Saigon to check the price of beef noodle soup.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 14 (AP)—The Rev. Carl McIn tire said today that Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky would attend the “March for Victory rally in Washington and predicted that Mr. Ky would “out‐Agnew Agnew.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 14 (UPI)—The United States command reported to day that 3,200 servicemen were withdrawn from South Vietnam last week, reducing American troop strength in the war zone to 396,300 men. President Nixon's goal is 384,000 men by Oct. 15.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 14 (AP)—Communist troops to day hurled back advance ele ments of a Cambodian task force that was trying to gain control of a 50‐mile segment of a key highway north of this capital, a military spokesman said. In fighting that lasted from midnight until after daybreak, 20 Cambodian soldiers were re ported killed and about 60 wounded. Government com manders said 20 enemy dead had been left on the field, and they estimated that 200 more dead and wounded had been carried away in the darkness.
Mayor Lindsay told the coun try's National Guard leadership yesterday that neither hawks nor doves should use the flag for narrow political purposes.
ALBANY, Sept. 14—In their first joint speaking appearance, the three major New York State candidates for the United States Senate joined tonight in criticizing the lengthy pre‐trial detention of Black Panthers in Manhattan.
AMMAN, Jordan, Sept. 14— A spokesman of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine said tonight that it was treating the American hostages “on the same basis as Israelis” and that they would be released when the Israelis were released.
A Democratic City Council man called for the resignation of Jerry Finkelstein as chair man of the New York City Democratic Committee yester day, on the ground that Mr. Finkelstein “plotted to defeat antiwar legislation in the Coun cil” to serve the political inter ests of his son, Assemblyman Andrew J. Stein.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 15— President Nixon will leave Sept. 27 on an eight‐day European tour, the White House an nounced today. The journey will focus'on America's Medi terranean allies and is also ex pected to include a visit to Yugoslavia.
SEATTLE, Sept. 15—Senator Henry M. Jackson won renomi nation by an overwhelming margin today in the Demo cratic primary.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 15 (AP) —The State Department today announced an extension for six more months of restrictions on travel to Cuba, Communist China, North Korea and North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON—A curious misconception argues the para dox that strength is tantamount to weakness in this compli cated post‐industrial age of cybernetics. The idea is poetic but untrue. The logic of power remains but it is worthless if it is not applied.
ROCHESTER, Sept. 15—Rep resentative Richard L. Ottinger today called for “drastic sim plificatjon” of the tax laws as they apply to the small busi nessman.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 15 (AP)—South Vietnam ese field commanders said to day that their forces had with drawn from one mountaintop base in the northern sector of the country and were planning to pull out of another because of the approaching monsoon season.
BOSTON, Wednesday, Sept. 16—The Rev. Robert J. Drinan, a Roman Catholic priest on leave as dean of the Boston College Law School, turned antiwar sentiment into a lever to defeat Representative Philip J. Philbin in a Democratic pri mary.
MANHATTAN, Kan., Sept. 16 — President Nixon made a strong appeal today for the restoration of civility and an end to violence and intolerance in American society.Delivering the annual Alf Landon Lecture before 15,000 faculty members and students in the Kansas State University Fieldhouse, Mr. Nixon used the taunts of a few and the over whelming sympathy of most of those present to fashion one of the most enthusiastic public ap pearances of his Presidency.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 16—The widows of South Vietnamese soldiers are angry, and their reasons are the same ones that so many South Vietnamese cite the growing inflation, the red tape in Gov ernment agencies that are sup posed to help them, the lack of housing in the cities.
MINNEAPOLIS, Sept. 16— The 1970 primary election sea son, which began in Illinois on March 17, came to an end yes terday, with the exception of run‐offs in Florida and Georgia and Hawaii's bolloting on Oct. 3.
BOSTON, Sept. 16 —The nomination of a Jesuit priest to replace a 2S‐year veteran of Congress and the hard‐won primary victory of Mayor Kevin H. White of Boston has political analysts studying a voter profile they thought they knew well.
SEATTLE, Sept. 16— An ef fort by the peace movement to defeat Senator Henry M. Jack son failed yesterday as the three‐term Democrat won eas ily in Washington's senatorial primary. With almost 95 per cent of the ballots counted, Senator Jackson had more than 459,000 votes while his opponent, Carl Maxey, a Negro, had only 73, 000.
FORT HOOD, Tex, Sept. 16 (UPI)— The military judge in the trial of a Louisiana soldier charged with assault to mur der 30 South Vietnamese civili ans at Songmy delayed a de cision today on whether to sub poena President Nixon and other top government officials to testify. Col. George R. Rob inson said that he would rule on defense motions on other matters before the start of trial testimony.
Ten persons who visited the Communist capitals of Asia re turned here last night and said that 374 letters from American prisoners of war to their fam ilies had been seized by United States Customs agents at Ken nedy International Airport. The Iservice declined to confirm or deny the allegation.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Sept. 17 — Enemy gunners shot down and de stroyed nine United States hell copters and damaged eight oth ers in the last six days, killing four Americans and wounding six, the United States command reported today.
PARIS, Sept. 16 (AP)—The Vietcong delegation to the Paris peace talks said today that Mrs. Nguyen TM Binh, Foreign Minister of the pro visional Vietcong government, would resume her place tomor row at the talks.
ARCADIA, Fla., Sept. 16 (AP)—Walter Lee Martin, a twice‐wounded Vietnam vet eran who is now 15 years old, became the father of son today as he prepared to re‐enter the eighth grade.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 16 (UPI)—John W. McCormack, speaker of the House, an nounced today that a special joint meeting of the House and Senate would be held Tuesday to deplore North Vietnam's “in humane treatment” of United States prisoners. He said that wives of prisoners had sought the session.
A soldier's challenge to or ders sending him to Vietnam on the ground that the war is unconstitutional was dismissed yesterday by a Federal judge in Brooklyn.
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich., Sept. 16—Vice President Agnew ended his first campaign tour today in a shouting match with antiwar demonstrators and with a plea to blue‐collar Democrats to prove their patriotism by voting Republican.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 18—The proposals by the Vietcong were being studied here today, but the immediate reaction among officials was that they provided no grounds for hope of an early settlement.
PARIS, Sept. 17—The Viet cong, with the support of North Vietnam, declared today that in exchange for an agreement on the withdrawal of all American and other foreign forces from South Vietnam by June 30 of next year, the Communists would refrain from attacking the withdrawing troops.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 17— Administration officials found nothing promising for nego tiation in their initial read ings today of the Vietcong's revised peace proposals at Paris.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 17 —Following is a comparison of the position taken in Paris to day by the Vietcong with those put forth in May, 1969, plus (those set out by President Nixon in a June, 1969, speech and by President Nguyen Van. Thieu of South Vietnam in various statements.
GENEVA, Sept. 17—Among the more than 50 hostages still held by the Arab com mandos is Specialist 4 Ken neth Hubler, an American soldier who was on his way back to the United States after he escaped from Viet cong captivity, a spokesman for Swissair said in Zurich today.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Sept. 17 (AP) — S. Sgt. David Mitchell listened intently today as he was accused on a television news film of ordering an old man shot during the alleged Songmy massacre.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 17 — The Navy announced today plans to deactivate 58 ships including the aircraft carrier Shangri‐La, currently operating off Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnan, Sept. 17 — American comfit casualties in the war have bean reduced by about one half in the last year, according to fig ures released today by the United States command.
Senator Charles E. Goodell told 2,000 students at Queens College yesterday that “vio lence is to be abhorred—wheth er it is pursued in the name of revolution or in the name ut law and order, whether prac ticed by students or sheriff's deputies, whether perpetrated by Weathermen or Minute men.”
Eldridge Cleaver, head of the Black Panther party's interna tional section, in Algiers, head ed a group of 11 persons who filed suit here yesterday de manding the return of 9,000 feet of film seized Wednesday by United States Customs agents at Kennedy Internation al Airport.
PARIS, Sept. 17—Follow ing in unofficial translation from the Vietnamese is a text of remarks made here today by Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, head of the Vietcong delegation to the Vietnam talks, on Communist pro posals for a peace settlement:
When the expanded peace talks in Paris began to take shape late in 1968 even some members of the Na tional Liberation Front's delegation hinted that Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh's leader ship of its side would last only as long as the talks were in the preliminary stage. A man it was widely be lieved, would re place her as soon as the negotia tions got down to serious business. But Mrs. Binh has lasted. Her state ments at the talks have been as unswerving as her dark, expressionless eyes while she has faced three United States negotiators, enunciat ing, as she did yesterday, terms for a peace settlement.
BOSTON, Sept. 17 (AP)— More than 6,000 Vietnam veter ans turned out yesterday for the first of a two‐day job mart ;at the Suffolk Downs racetrack. Representatives of hun dreds of companies, as well as Government agencies and other employers are taking part in the Job Mart, aimed at :iecuring employment for jobless veter ans from New England.
WASHINGTON—An immense distinction must be drawn be tween the positions of Premier Meir and President Nixon as they meet in the White House. Mrs. Meir is negotiating for Israel's existence.
PALO ALTO. Calif., Sept. 17 —When President Nixon's tough Kansas State speech against the fist and bullet uni versity activists gets serious praise on the much more liberal Stanford University campus, it is a fairly good sign that the 1970 school year is opening on a different note.
MINNEAPOLIS, Sept. 17— When Hubert H. Humphrey is up, he is very, very up. Last night he was in vintage form as he savored his victory in Tuesday's Senatorial primary election here.
Representative Richard L. Ottinger, meeting yesterday with 15 editors of foreign‐lan guage newspapers in the city, was questioned closely about his views on foreign policy by the journalists, many of whom had had first‐hand experience with dictatorial regimes abroad.
LOUISVILLE, Ky., Sept 18, (UPI) — Photographers will be present to record any harass ment of antiwar demonstrators on a visit by Vice President Ag new next Tuesday, the Ken tucky Civil Liberties Union has announced. Three local groups plan to demonstrate while the Vice President is here to cam paign for Representative Wil liam O. Cowger.
SYDNEY, Australia, Sept. 18 —More than 300 persons were arrested today as an estimated 50,000 people took part in Viet nam peace demonstrations in Australian cities.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 18—The South Vietnam ese Senate passed a bill today allowing President Nguyen Van Thieu to devalue the piaster for certain transactions, but it refused to give him the special economic powers that he had sought. The bill now goes back to the House of Representa tives.
PARIS, Sept. 18 (AP) —David K. E. Bruce, head of the United States delegation to the Paris talks, scrambled the wine and the bottles yester day in talking about peace proposals presented by Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh of the Viet cong.
The new “flexibility” that was promised when Am bassador David K. E. Bruce went to the Paris peace talks as chief United States negotiator was not in evidence in the hasty American reaction to Communist proposals this week.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 18—Foreign Minister Tran Van Lam of South Vietnam said here today that the Vietcong pro posal might be a trap and was in any case a propaganda move. He noted that Mrs. Binh “said they would stop attack ing during the withdrawal of American troops.”
A defense lawwyer asked a Criminal Court judge yesterday to find someone more “impar ‘tial” than Manhattan District’ Attorney Frank S. Hogan to prosecute his client, a rabbi charged with disrupting a temple service last spring.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 18—The National Committee for a Political Settlement in Vietnam announced today that 16 Sena tors had joined 14 others in urging President Nixon to pro pose a cease‐fire in South Viet nam.
SKOUN, Cambodia, Sept. 18 —Some 3,000 Government re lief troops and a supply convoy today linked up with a task force of about 4,500 soldiers seeking to liberate Kompong Thom from enemy encircle ment.
DETROIT, Sept. 18 (AP) —Senator Philip A. Hart, Demo crat of Michigan, today con demned youths who shouted ob scenities at Vice President Ag new in Michigan Wednesday.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 18—The Foreign Ministry of South Vietnam today de scribed as “old, oft‐repeated, absurd demands” the eight‐point peace program presented yes terday at the Paris peace talks by ‘Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, for eign minister of the Vietcong's provisional revolutionary gov ernment.
Thirty‐two New York art galleries and nearly a dozen out of town will stage simulta neous “Art for Peace” exhibi tions, beginning today and run ning through next Saturday. The shows, which will culmi nate in an auction at Parke Bernet Sept. 29, consist of work donated by artists for the benefit of Referendum 70, a national, non‐partisan organi zation which seeks to elect anti‐war Congressional candidates.
PARIS, Sept. 19 (Reuters)—A North Vietnamese official re fused to comment today on a report from Washington that United States efforts to draw Hanoi and the Vietcong into private talks had not been fruitful.
SAIGON—It is now two and one‐half months since the Amer icans concluded their dramatic move into Cambodia and the monsoons began turning the Ho Chi Minh trail into a ribbon of mud and the Mekong Delta into a lake.
WESTFIELD, N. J., Sept. 19 — Miss Patricia Catherine Simmons was married here to day to Gerald Joseph Hughes, who recently returned from a year's tour of duty as an Army lieutenant in Vietnam. The ceremony in Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church was performed by the Rev. Joseph Belatti.
Representative Richard L. Ot tinger yesterday won the en dorsement of the New York State chapter of Americans for Democratic Action in his race for United States Senator, de splte a strong showing by his Republican‐Liberal opponent, Senator Charles E. Goodell.
CAIRO.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 19 (AP) — A Thai charter plane, hijacked yesterday by an American with a prison rec ord in Arizona, was hit by ground fire over Laos before it landed the hijacker in North Vietnam, the pilot said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 19 (Reuters)—American helicopter gunships attacked North Vietnamese troops in northernmost Quangtri Prov ince early this morning and killed 18 with heavy machine guns, a United States spokes man said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 19—Is there something special about South Vietnam that lures foreigners here and keeps them under a spell?
PARIS; Sept. 19 (Reuters)— Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, chief negotiator for the Vietcong at the Paris peace talks, said to day that peace proposals she presented this week had been worked out after contacts with other groups in South Vietnam, including officials of the Sai gon Government and members of the army.
PARIS — After interminably dreary months of fruitless ses sions, the Vietnamese peace talks suddenly sprang to life last week as a result of a new Com munist negotiating Initiative.
This is the first of three articles ex ploring the relation of our domestic agenda and our policy in Asia.
To the Editor:
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Sept. 20—Vice President Ngu yen Cao Ky went on South Vietnamese national television tonight to confirm that he would make his trip to Wash ington as planned and that he would participate in the con troversial prowar March for Victory rally to he held Oct. on the grounds of the Wash ington Monument.
TOKYO, Sept. 20 — Sena tor Strom Thurmond called on Japan today to step up her defense effort and “to under take a greater proportion of the leadership necessary to the de fense” of non‐Communist Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 20 (AP) — North Viet namese gunners shot down United States helicopter trying to land a reconnaissance team a mile south of the demilitarized zone today, then fired mortars into an armored relief force. Eleven Americans were re ported killed and 11 wounded in the two attacks.
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Sept. 21 (AP)—Plans to try Pvt. Max D. Hutson, 23 years old, of Williamsport, Ind., on charges stemming from an in vestigation into the alleged massacre in 1968 at Mylai 4, a hamlet in the South Viet namese village of Songmy, were announced today by the Army. But charges that could have brought the death penalty were dropped. The Army also re ferred charges of assault to commit murder and false swear ing against Sgt. Charles E. Hut ton, 22, of Tallulah, La., for trial. No date for either trial was announced.
WASHINGTON, Sept 21—John Kenneth Galbraith, who has long viewed his party from its left wing, is beginning to sound like a centrist Democrat.
LONG BEACH, L. I., Sept. 21 —A 48‐year‐old publishing ex ecutive here, charged with vio lating a city ordinance against handing out leaflets, filed $250,000 lawsuit against the city and two officials on the ground that his Constitutional rights were violated.
Vice President Agnew, wran gling with student leaders here last night, said it was “under standable” that construction workers attacked antiwar dem onstrators.
SKOUN, Cambodia, Sept. 21 — The Premier of Cambodia, Gen, Lon Nol, and his top mili tary leaders flew by helicopter today to visit the column of troops stalled for more than a week by enemy positions on the road to Kompong Thom, a pro vincial capital 85 miles north of Pnompenh.
Contrary to every short‐run political and personal interest, three successive American Presidents decided over the past decade that the events set in mo tion by a prompt withdrawal of our forces and commitment from Vietnam and the Asian mainland would risk larger war there and create dangerous instability elsewhere.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 21 (AP)—The revised “hamlet evaluation system” used by United States officials to meas ure pacification in South Viet nam indicated today that as of Aug. 31, 92.8 per cent of the country's population was under government control, and only 184,700 people were under Viet cong control.
Representative Richard L. Ottinger said yesterday that “massive Republican defec‐! tions” from Senator Charles Goodell gave James L. Buckley! “a respectable crack at win‐1 ning” the three‐way United States Senate race.
Malaria cases diagnosed in this country increased by al most 50 per cent last year over the figure for 1968; and pre liminary data for 1970 show further sharp rise, the Center for Disease Control has re ported.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 22 (Reuters)—Cambodian troops pushed slowly through flooded’ rice paddies and heavy under growth today in an attempt to surround some 3,500 Commu nist troops blocking the route to the strategic provincial capi tal of Kompong Thom, accord ing to military spokesmen here.
TOKYO, Sept. 22 (Reuters) —Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam arrived here from Saigon today en route to Paris and Washington.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 22—The House and Senate held an unusual joint meeting today to hear a former astronaut, Frank Borman, plead for greater at tention to the plight of Ameri cans held as prisoners of war in Vietnam.
To the Editor:
In the aftermath of Cambodia and Kent State last May. Princeton University decided that it would shut. down for two weeks before the November elections to give students and faculty every opportunity to work for the candidates of their choice. The recess is to be offset by extension of the academic year.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 22 (UPI) — Federal Judge Howard F. Corcoran took under advise ment today a motion by the Army to switch the location of a hearing in the case of a News week magazine reporter, Henry P. Lieferman, who says he was called to active duty and or dered sent to Vietnam in re taliation for articles he wrote. The Government asked that the case be moved to South Caro lina because the reporter is stationed at Fort Jackson.
WINDSOR LOCKS, Conn., Sept. 22 (AP)—Sargent Shriver called Vice President Agnew a “radical rightist” today and suggested that Mr. Agnew make a nationwide tour with Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam.
What is Asia?
PARIS, Sept. 22—Two basic Communist proposals rejected up to now by the United States and the Saigon Government as conditions for a settlement of the Vietnamese war were re iterved today as “legitimate demands” by Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, foreign minister of the Vietcong's provisional revolu tionary government.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 22 —The Justice Department urged the Supreme Court today not to rule on the constitutionality of the Vietnam war, warning that if the Court should order a sudden end to the war, dis astrous military and diplomatic results could follow.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 22 (UPI)—Noting that many mili tary dogs are killed when they outlive their usefulness, Rep resentative John E. Moss., Dem ocrat of California introduced today a bill to return K9 dogs from overseas duty for retain ing or retirement in humane shelters in ‘'ie United States Mr. Moss said that since 1966 about 10,000 German Shep herds have been shipped to South Vietnam and other over seas postts. The use of dogs in combat areas, he said, re duces human casualties by 65 per cent.
INDIANAPOLIS, Sept. 23 —Vice President Agnew said to day that he did not believe the impending visit of Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam to Washington “is going to serve a useful pur pose.” He said that such a visit “may be a mistake.”
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 23 — The Cambodian military spokesman said today that government troops had occupied several villages near the enemy stronghold of Tang kok.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 23—With law and order emerging as perhaps the key campaign issue, the Democratic‐controlled Congress moved swiftly today to give President Nixon the anticrime and drug‐abuse legis lation he has long sought.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Sept. 23 — Thailand proposed today that the Big Four pow ers together seek to restore peace in Southeast Asia.
COPENHAGEN, Sept. 23—The rather staid annual meet ing of the World Bank and its sister organization, the Inter national Monetary Fund, has provoked an unusual series of demonstrations by left‐wing Danish students who say the institutions are instruments of neocolonialism.
PARIS, Sept. 24—David K.E. Bruce, chief of the United States delegation at the Viet nam peace talks, told delegates of the other side today that their proposals of last week had not changed their basic position.
ALBANY, Sept. 24—The State Education Commissioner ruled today that a local school board had acted properly in dismissing a teacher for wear ing a black armband to class in support of last year's Viet nam moratorium activities.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 24—The antiballistic missile debate in Congress was ended today with a decision to restrict the Safeguard ABM system, to the protection of Minuteman inter continental missile bases.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 24—The Defense Department plans to cut three more divisions from the standing Army over the next nine months, bringing the number of divisions to the lowest point in more than 10 years. Additional cuts are under consideration.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 24 (UPI) — The United States command said today that 52 Americans were killed in the Vietnam war last week and 333 were wounded. The number killed, the same as reported for the week ended Aug. 22, was the lowest in nearly four years.
Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky is a nimble politician but he cannot bring off his pose of wide‐eyed innocence about his trip to Washington to address a win‐the‐war rally next week. He is coming to help his extreme right wing sponsors pressure the Nixon Administration to scrap its policy of “Vietnamization,” with gradual American withdrawal, and revert to a delusive “victory” strategy. He is coming to help undermine whatever chance there may be for negotiating a Vietnam settle ment in Paris—an effort to which his own Government, as well as the United States is officially committed.
These are excerpts from the Govern ment brief filed Sept. 22 in the U.S. Supreme Court replying to Massachu setts’ challenge of the legality of the Vietnam war. It was signed by Solici tor General Erwin N. Griswold and Assistant Attorney General William D. Ruclzelshaus:
HONG KONG, Sept. 25 (UPI) —North Vietnam has ordered increased conscription and re cruiting for its armed forces, according to Western analysts specializing in Communist af fairs.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 25—Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's adviser on foreign pol icy, has scheduled a Paris meeting tomorrow with Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam to try to per suade him not to attend a “March for Victory” rally here next week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept 25 (AP) — United States heli copters carrying South Viet namese infantrymen into com bat six miles south of the de militarized zone today flew into a hail of enemy small‐arms fire, and about 10 of the air craft were hit, field reports said.
INDEPENDENCE, Mo., Sept. 25 (AP) — Gen. William West moreland stopped in Independ ence today for a brief visit with former President Harry S. Truman. The former comman der of American forces in Vietnam was to deliver a clas sified address at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.
LOS ANGELES, Sept. 26—As college campuses opened across the country this week, thousands of student political activists were preparing to take an important role in about 70 elections for House and Sen ate seats.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26—The Federal Government backs the world's most farflung and varied collection of medical and health programs. They include care for Palestinian refugees, and Cuban expatriates; train ing nurses in Samoa; birth con trol information for Vietnam ese; ridding Iran of Malaria, and operation of dental clinics in the Panama Canal Zone.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Sept. 26—Sir Robert Thompson, the British expert on counterin surgency, arrived here yester day for a 24‐hour stopover dur ing a fact‐finding visit of sev eral weeks to South Vietnam for President Nixon.
WASHINGTON — “The worst part of captivity is the isolation.
Malaria is still a scourge of much of the world despite at tempts during recent decades to eradicate this parasitic disease. Progress has been made in some countries. But biological condi tions such as resistance of the mosquito to some insecticides and some strains of the parasite to drugs, administrative prob lems such as the lack of ade quate numbers of trained per sonnel, and political turmoil are among the factors that have limited malaria control in most underdeveloped countries.
Representative Richard L. Ot tinger, the Democratic candi date for Senator, urged yester day that United States econom ic aid to South Vietnam be con ditioned on Saigon's willingness to institute governmental re forms.
The crisis on American campuses has no parallel in the history of the nation. This crisis has roots in divi sions of American society as deep as any since the Civil War. The divisions are re flected in violent acts and harsh rhetoric, and in the en mity of those Americans who see themselves as occupying opposing camps. Campus un rest reflects and increases a more profound crisis in the nation as a whole.
PARIS, Sept. 26 — Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam has decided not to attend a rightist win the‐war rally in Washington next Saturday.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26—Dr. Benjamin Spock, the pedi atrician, said today that he was taking “as a compliment” the new term “Spockmanship,” that has been coined and used by Vice President Agnew.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26—Some thing very serious and dangerous is now happening between the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union. They are clearly misjudging one another in Southeast Asia, the Middle East and Cuba, and this could be tragic for them and for the peace of the world.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26 —Twenty‐eight commissioned of ficers of the Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps an nounced today their intention to speak against the war in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 26—Senator Edward M. Kennedy called today for the creation of an international relief organi zation for Indochina to cope with what he described as “regional crisis of people” that has resulted from the fighting in South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
To Prevent Deadlock in Presidential Election
The Vietnam peace negotiations in Paris again show welcome signs of life. For almost a year, there has been nothing to talk about and, for most of that time, no one to talk to. Now, with all four participants again repre sented by high‐level delegates, new proposals have been made formally by the Communists and informally by Saigon and there are indications that private talks are getting under way again.
PRINCETON, N. J., Sept. 26 —A majority of the United States public favors the Hat field‐McGovern plan, which would end troop involvement in Vietnam by the end of 1971, according to the findings in the most recent Gallup Poll.
CHULAI, South Vietnam, Sept. 19—“There are a lot of people in the Army who would like to get you, Ron,” Maj. Wil liam Gabella, information offi cer for the Americal Division, said.
The President's Commission on Campus Unrest has issued an impassioned plea to lift the controversy that divides the country out of the morass of political exploi tation. The virtue of this appeal is that it combines humane cry of conscience with a sensible, even tough, mandate to all parties for a return to reason and decency. It joins the students’ abhorrence of the war and social injustice, but avoids the cliche that peace abroad and utopia at home are the only preconditions for cam pus tranquillity.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 27—South Vietnam's Vice President, Nguyen Cao Ky, declared today that a cease‐fire in Vietnam was “the first step” toward peaceful solution of the war. But he did not elaborate.
To the Editor: Much of what has been written and said about the recent victory of Salva dor Allende in the Chilean Presiden tial election has seemed more the product of emotion than of cold anal ysis of the facts. Perhaps a recitation of a few of the relevant facts would be in order.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Sept. 27 (AP)—Vietcong forces attacked three villages this weekend, military spokesmen reported today. They said the attacks had been directed against the Government's pac ification program.
ABOARD U.S.S. SARATOGA, in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, Sept. 29—President Nixon last night ordered cancellation of today's exercises of the United States Sixth Fleet in the Medi terranean because of the death of President Gamal Abdel Nas ser of Egypt.
PARIS, Sept. 28—The fol lowers of the deposed Cam bodian Chief of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, are closely watching the Vietnam peace talks here as the possible key to political victory in Cam bodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 28 (Reuters)—The United States military command said today that no Americans were killed in South, Vietnam yester day. It was the second time this ‘month that no deaths were re ported over a 24‐hour Period.
KENT, Ohio, Sept. 28—While candles sputtered in a cold, driving rain, several thousand Kent State University students gathered tonight on the gentle, grassy slope where four stu dents died last May 4 in a burst of National Guard rifle fire.
To the Editor: Prof. Gordon C. Zahn [letter Sept. 14] has presented an accurate analysis of the role of bombing and terrorism in the current phase of American his tory, with one significant exception. When he states that he finds “some of our most dedicated oppo nents of the war joining people like General LeMay... who believe that the only way to get the peace we want is by more and more violence and bigger and better bombs,” his analysis is unsound.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 29—The Rev. Dr. Carl McIntire, chair man of the “march for victory” scheduled here on Saturday, accused the Nixon Administra tion today of violating freedom of speech by dissuading Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam from appearing at the rally.
SIOUX FALLS, S. D., Sept. 29 —Vice President Agnew charged here today that the Presidential Commission On Campus Unrest had indulged in “ ‘scapegoating’ of the most irresponsible sort” in saying that only the Presi dent could offer the moral leadership needed to reunite the country.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 29—A 34‐year‐old mem ber of South Vietnam's Nation al Assembly defied President Nguyen Van Thieu today and renewed a call for the forma tion of a provisional Govern ment as a step toward peace.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 29 (AP)—The United States announced three new moves today to disengage its troops and equipment from the war, including completion of the transfer of a big combat base to the South Vietnamese Army.
SYDNEY, Australia, Sept. 29 —Prime Minister John G. Gor ton today survived a censure motion based on charges that he had ordered an official photograph “doctored” so that it made Gough Whitlam, the Opposition leader, appear to he making a speech under a Viet cong flag.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 29 (UPI)—The South Viet namese National Assembly to day completed and sent to President Nguyen Van Thieu a bill giving him the power to change the official exchange rate for United States military payment certificates being con verted to piasters.
To the Editor:
ALBANY, Sept. 29 — In the second face‐to‐face confronta tion of the United States Sen ate campaign, Representative Richard L. Ottinger sharply criticized the Nixon Adminis tration today and linked his two opponents to the Ad ministration.
To the Editor: John K. Fairbank (Topics column July 18) has somehow attributed “our nonvictory in Vietnam” to faulty, cold war rationales; “to stop aggression to insure self‐determination... to save democracy from totalitarian tyranny.. to win this round in the cold war... and so on.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Aug. 1 (UPI)—Supported by rockets and heavy mortars, Communist troops in Cambodia began a thrust north of Promperh last night and early today, military spokesmen said in Promperh.
CHICAGO. July 3I —Judge Julius J. Hoffman of Federal District Court accepted in a sealed envelope today the Government logs of electronic, eavesdropping on Bobby G. Seale, Black Panther party chairman.
Vietnamization, like the proverbial cat, seems to have at least nine lives, about five of which have already been lived. Vietnamization was tried first by the French nearly 20 years ago. On May 10, 1970, General Henri Navarre, formerly commander of the French forces in Indochina, said: “Vietnamization is an old idea. It was the basis of my own plan when I was sent to Indochina in 1952.”
PARIS, July 31—A spokesman for the North Vietnamese delegation at the peace talks said here today that President Nixon's remarks about Vietnam at a news conference last night showed that his Administration “still cherishes the delusion of obtaining a military victory” in order to “gain position of strength at the conference table.”
WASHINGTON, July 31—In their effort to counter speculation that the allies are preparing to make new concessions in the Vietnam talks, both President Nixon and President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam have indicated in the last 24 hours how little they expect from the next phase of negotiations in Paris. When Mr.’ Nixon announced on July 1 that he was sending a senior diplomat, David K. E. Bruce, to head the American delegation, he emphasized American “flexibility” and referred to the “new instructions” that Mr. Bruce would be carrying.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 31 — President Nguyen Van Thieu declared tonight that South Vietnam's conditions for peace were unchanged ‐and ruled out any coalition government with the Communists except one that might result from free, internationally supervised elections.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, July 31—Lieut. Gen. Do Cao Tri, commander of South Vietnam's III Corps tactical zone, around Saigon, denied today that he had made remarks critical of Thai military forces, attributed to him in an article in The New York Times on July 19.
EL TORO MARINE AIR STATION, Calif., July 31 (UPI)—First Lieut. Roger W. Mullins, Vietnam war veteran who had been decorated 34 times was ‘killed yesterday and four other men were seriously injured when their KC‐130.refueling plane crashed while making a practice landing here.
BOSTON, Aug. 1, (AP) —I Forty Army reservists in the Boston area have donated $424 from their summer training pay to Congressional peace candidates and anti‐war organizations.
HONG KONG. Aug. 1 (Reuters) — Defense Minister Vo Nguyen Giap of North Vietnam said last night that the United States would be defeated in Indochina because the Communists had time of their side.
Members of the 26th Army Band at Fort Wadsworth, S.I., have charged that they are being punished and intimidated by their commanding officers because they engaged in legal, off‐duty antiwar activity.
For the third time in two weeks a bank was bombed here yesterday.
To the Editor: In December 1965 I wrote after my first trip to Vietnam, “Whereas before my trip, I felt we should settle for nothing less than a complete military victory, I feel now that if we could get a satisfactory negotiated peace I would gladly accept such a peace.” After my second visit to Vietnam during much of which I was accompanied by the late Bernard Fall, I recommended to Secretary Robert McNamara that we stop the bombing of North Vietnam. Thus, I feel can speak as neither hawk or dove but as one interested in an early end to the hostilities
WASHINGTON, Aug. 1—The National Guard has met with mixed results in a twopronged campaign for experienced volunteers that some see as a forerunner of the effort to create an all‐volunteer Army.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 1 (UPI)— The Vietcong said today that President Nixon demonstrated in his news con ference last Thursday his wish to prolong the Indochina war.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 1—It may just be the illusion of the vacation season, but common sense seems to be breaking into the headlines these days. A cease‐fire now seems assured in the Middle East war. The casualty rate is down and the withdrawal is proceednig on schedule in Vietnam. The strategic arms limitation talks with the Soviets are going along slowly but sensibly and the American economy is beginning to get over the shakes.
THERE he was as big as a Mack truck—"Joe"—standing on the stoop of his West 79th Street brownstone, dressed entirely in black, his bald pate gleaming under the mid-morning sun. His name is really Peter Boyle, and he's a 34-year-old former Christian Brother from Philadelphia. But it's hard to think of him as anyone but "Joe" after seeing his sensational performance as the gun-loving, beer-swilling, tough-talking tool-and-die maker from Queens who hates "niggers," hippies and fags, and not necessarily in that order. Peter is such a good "Joe," in fact, that columnists are already touting him for the 1970 Oscar as best actor. And even those critics who jumped on "Joe" raved about Peter's performance.Peter is waiting outside his building, he says, because he doesn't want any stranger to see his sparsely furnished (TV, two chairs, a "Joe" poster, a bed) bachelor apartment. So he decides in his rather assertive manner ("I'm really very shy") that we will walk down Broadway and get some breakfast at a neighborhood greasy spoon. Peter is stopped several times along the way, and it is obvious by his reactions that he loves the recognition. Well, the guy deserves it. It's taken him 10 years of odd jobs, two-bit roles and "tough guy" commercials to get it."Hi, Joe!" a shaggy-haired youth shouts in passing. "Loved your movie." "Thanks," the grinning actor replies, proudly hoisting his slightly pot-bellied, 220-pound frame up to its full 6-feet-2-inches. At 77th and Broadway, where a scene for Woody Allen's new movie, "Bananas," is being filmed, a red-haired woman extra rushes up to Peter and kisses him on the cheek. "Oh, you were wonderful!" she squeals. "Thanks, Naomi." On the edge of the crowd, a handsome black actor pumps Peter's hand and says, "Hey, man, do you remember me from that beer commercial in Pittsburgh? You wore my orange sweatshirt." Peter remembers, and they talk about old times.Peter chooses a coffee shop at 75th and Broadway, and after ordering ham and eggs, he begins talking about the "incredible timing" of "Joe." At first his tone is matter-of-fact, but as he goes on, it becomes somber, disconsolate."We finished it last February, and that was way before Kent State or Jackson State or the construction workers beating up on the kids on Wall Street. Mylai had happened, of course, and I think the last scene in "Joe," where the kids are murdered in the commune, may have been inspired by that massacre. But none of us were prophetic—none of us knew that the hardhats were going to do what they did on Wall Street. The minute I heard about it, I knew it was going to affect the way the movie was received. I wasn't happy . . . who could be happy about that? If anything, I'm scared. I've been scared for a couple of years. I get scared when I meet people like Joe. And I get scared when I hear that kids are standing up at the end of the movie and yelling. 'I'm going to shoot back, Joe.' In fact, the other night I was walking down 46th Street and I had a flash of myself being shot down in the street, just because someone thought I really was Joe."Peter pauses for a moment, plucks eight pills in assorted colors of red, white and brown — "all vitamins," he says—from his shirt pocket, and gulps them down with orange juice."The message of the movie is very plain," he goes on. "It says that we'd just better stop that war in Vietnam now; that we'd just better stop killing our children there or we're going to be killing our children in the streets here. The Bible says that if you live by the sword, you die by the sword, and that's what's going to happen."Politically speaking, Peter says he is probably best described as a "conservative radical." "I got that from Norman Mailer," he says, "and I like it, although I did not support Mailer for Mayor. I did not want to encourage such excesses of megalomania." Peter traces his "leftward leanings" to Chicago in the summer of 1968, when he was acting at Second City at the time the Democratic convention was going on."One night I was standing peacefully with some friends in front of a bar in Old Town," he recalls, "and some cops started chasing us. An Episcopal clergyman picked us up in his car, and gave us sanctuary in his house. I remember saying, 'My God, I'm in America, and I'm afraid for my life!' I'm always ready for a fight at any time, but quite frankly, I didn't want my face beaten in just then because I had acting jobs. On another night I was just sitting in my apartment on Schiller Street and I was tear-gassed. At first I thought it was a sneeze coming on, so I took a vitamin C tablet. Then I discovered it was tear gas wafting down from Lincoln Park where the kids were getting gassed."Despite it all, Peter says he is not entirely unsympathetic with "Joe." "He's a man who's really trapped," he says. "He doesn't like his job, his taxes are sky high, and his kids are causing him trouble at home. Sometimes I worry that maybe we were too hard on him. He is lovable in his own way. But then I get to thinking how scary it is that the hardhats are becoming activists, and it reminds me of the brownshirts in Germany during the thirties. The hardhats say they're patriotic, but their unions are the most notoriously racist of all the unions. If that's who's representing patriotism in our country, then we're really in trouble."Peter wasn't the first choice for "Joe." He read for the part three times and was told he was "marvelous—but too young," so an older, more experienced actor was selected. He didn't work out, and Peter was called in after production had begun to take over the role. He was paid a total of $2,520 for six weeks' work."At the tryouts, I improvised instead of reading the script they gave me," he says, "because I had been hearing that character all my life. In Philly, where I grew up, people all around me were spouting off about 'those damn niggers, and people on welfare, and wops, and kikes.' I did the same type of character at Second City, and I knew the character so well that when it came to the actual shooting of the movie, I was worried that I would do a caricature.""Joe" is not his first movie, but it is the first one he has made a splash in. He was an extra in "The Group," and played the man who ran the gun range in "Medium Cool." Peanuts, as far as money goes, but he managed to support himself fairly well doing commercials for TWA (he was the baggage handler), Buick (he was a customer) and Instant Replay (he was a baseball catcher who caught "the best pitcher in baseball—Tom Seaver"). He has a small part in a group therapy scene in the upcoming "Diary of a Mad Housewife," which he did after "Joe" was completed. "David Gill ["Joe's" producer] told me I was crazy to do that bit with 'Joe' coming up. I said, 'Look, I don't have any idea what's going to happen to 'Joe.'"Breakfast is over. We walk up Broadway and into Riverside Park, where Peter straddles a park bench. Curly black hair shows beneath his unbuttoned shirt, and he looks so rough, tough and ugly-handsome that he reminds one of Rod Steiger . . . no, Telly Savalas . . . no, the late William Bendix, Or better yet, a mixture of the three, Machismo.It's not surprising, then, that his acting idol is Marlon Brando. "He's the best," Peter declares. "I had this fantasy of meeting him the other day. Frankly, I'd be a little scared of meeting him. I mean, what would I say?"Peter was born in Philadelphia to Irish immigrant parents. His late father, whose professional name was Pete Boyle, was a commercial artist who later hosted children's shows on a TV station there. Mrs. Boyle now lives in New York with one of Peter's two sisters.Peter became a Christian Brother while a student at La Salle College, but he left the order soon after graduation. "My name was Brother Francis," he recalls, "and I prayed so hard I had callouses on my knees. I tried to reach God, I did a lot of studying, and I found it was an unnatural way to live. The celibacy is ridiculous. Boy, I really got horny."I'm really into a Zen thing now," he goes on, lying down on his back on the park bench. "I just don't like the authoritarianism of the Catholic Church. And I don't like the materialism I see in the parishes, with their concern for money and building larger and larger schools. But there are some very exciting people in the church now, like Father Berrigan."The next stop after the monastery was the U. S. Navy, where Peter was discharged after a few months of service because of a "severe nervous breakdown." Then he headed for New York, with dreams of becoming an actor. He took lessons from Uta Hagen, worked in the Post Office and as a bouncer at O'Neals' pub, toured in the national company of "The Odd Couple," and finally hit pay dirt in the television commercial world.Although he has nothing in the works right now, he says he hopes his next job will be another movie. "You can improvise in the movies. I know, I know, the screenwriters will pull out their hair when they read that. They're all overpaid, anyway. When people first started making movies, the actors improvised. Charlie Chaplin improvised."Peter improvised some of the dialogue in "Joe," including one line of his lone nude scene where he makes love to a hippie girl. "I really felt uptight about that scene," he says. "For one thing, I weighed 10 pounds more than I do now. Anyway, I take her breast in my mouth and she says, 'Hey, wait a minute.' Well, I ad-libbed. 'I hope I'm not out of line,' and they left it in."Does he worry about being typecast as a Silent Majority man?"It's a danger. I've been thinking about it a lot recently. But I think I can do other things. I remember once going up for it part, and the woman said, 'You don't look menacing enough.' This summer I'm in the CBS Comedy Tonight show [Sundays at 9 P.M.], and I took that so I could show people I could do other things, too." (If you don't recognize him on the show, that's probably because he'll be wearing his hair-piece.)Although Peter has been "reasonably close to marriage once or twice," he is wary because he has seen so many unhappy marriages among his friends. "I know that if I'd gotten married when I came out of the monastery, I would probably be getting a divorce by now. Being a bachelor has its points. By the time you're 34, you've really been through a lot of things with women, and you know what you don't want. What I want is children. I think a man and woman who live together and have children are very courageous."It is noon and Peter has an appointment with a photographer, so we walk back to his building. I leave him as I found him, standing on the stoop and guarding the door because he is ashamed of having a stranger see his bare apartment.Judging from the long lines of people queued up to see "Joe," Peter probably won't he ashamed much longer.
In a lengthy statement on Laos last March 6 which proved to be less than wholly candid, President Nixon declared that his Administration had “no plans for introducing ground combat forces into Laos.”
PITTSBURGH, Aug. 1—Miss Carol Pauline Zurheide, a 1969 alumna of Chatham College, was married in a garden ceremony on the campus here today to William K. Block Jr., who returned in April from service in Vietnam with the First Cavalry Division.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 1—Communist forces were reported to have fought their way yesterday and today into the centers of three towns north of Pnompenh—including one provincial capital—and were said to have repulsed Government efforts to dislodge them.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 2 (AP)—Maj. Gen. Nguyen Ngoc Loan, the former national police chief who startled the world when he was photographed executing Vietcong prisoner on a Saigon street during the 1968 Tet offensive, was named a special assistant in the South Vietnamese Defense Ministry today.
DANANG. South Vietnam—He is a very different boy, even in this country Where not many children lead safe, childlike lives. Vo Van Be is too small. too solemn, too silent for a boy of 11 —although he does not really know if that is his exact age.

PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 3—Heavy fighting in the pro vincial capital of Kompong Thom entered its second day this morning as Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops pressed their apparent objec tive of occupying the town, 80 miles north of Pnompenh.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 3—The Administration's candor — or lack of it — in explaining its Vietnam troop withdrawal poli cies has become an issue in former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey's campaign for a Senate seat from Minnesota.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 3—Ken O'Donnell, in an article in Life magazine, has shed inter esting but not conclusive light on two matters of large histori cal importance—how John F. Kennedy came to choose Lyn don B. Johnson as his running mate in 1960, and whether Mr. Kennedy, had he lived, would have pursued the war in Viet nam to the extent that Mr. Johnson ultimately did.
PLEIKU, South Vietnam, July 29—Mai is not a good looking woman, in the eyes of some Vietnamese men, for her shoulders are too big and the bottoms of her heels are not pink or soft. There are still calluses on her hands, although the frosted pink fin gernails are long and curved now.
NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y., Aug. 3 (AP) — Second Lieut. Robert Kaslu, an offensive guard with the Buffalo Bills, has been killed in action in Vietnam, the Bills reported today. Kaslu was killed by mortar fire July 21.
PARIS, Aug. 3 (Reuters)—David K. E. Bruce arrived here today to assume his position as chief of the United States dele gation to the Vietnam peace talks. He said only that he would have board latitude in the negotiations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 4 (AP) — Sharp fighting was reported today in the Me kong Delta 42 miles southwest of Saigon, where Government troops said they had killed 44 enemy soldiers in a day‐long battle.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 4—The White House insisted today that United States aircraft were flying only “interdiction” mis sions against enemy forces in Cambodia.
Senator Eugene J. McCarthy gave his endorsement yester day to Arthur J. Goldberg, Democratic‐Liberal candidate for Governor, and Representa tive Richard L. Ottinger, Demo cratic candidate for United States Senator.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 4 (AP)—The Cambodian com mand reported today that its troops drove hundreds of North Vietnamese and Vietcong sol diers out of the provincial cap ital Kompong Thom yesterday after three days of fighting.
HONG KONG, Aug. 4 (Reut ers)—North Vietnam today ac cused the United States of having attacked villages in the northern part of the demili tarized zone last Friday and Saturday. The North Vietnam ese press agency said American warplanes, including B52's, bombed Huong Lap and Vinh Son Villages.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 4—Military personnel who recently served in Cambodia would be entitled to the special tax bene fits received by service person nel in combat areas, under a proposed change in tax regula tions announced today by the Treasury Department.
LOS ANGELES. Aug. 4 (UPI) —The number of alienated young people is much greater than most people believe, and a “speed‐up” of the educational system will be a prime need as their numbers grow, a Presi dential commission was told today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 5 (AP)—Brig. Gen. Nguyen Van Thien, commander of Government military zone en compassing Quangnam Province and Danang, has been reported missing on a flight from Da nang to Saigon. The South Vietnamese Air Force jet he was in is believed to have crashed yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 5—The United States will field its fourth negotiating team in two years at the Paris talks with North Vietnam tomorrow, with only slender hope that it can break the deadlock in the foreseeable future.
Mayor and Mrs. Lindsay were hosts to 160 wounded Vietnam veterans yesterday at a lawn party at Gracie Mansion —the first reception Mr. Lind say has given Vietnam veterans in his four and one half years as Mayor.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 5—One of Premier Lon Nol's closest advisers said today that the Cambodian Government could last only six months more without important mili tary and economic aid, princi pally from the United States.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 5—Ad ministration sources reiterated today that the United States would not.use American ground troops in Cambodia to save the anti‐Communist regime of Pre mier Lon Not and would not raise the level of the war there.
“Summer Festival for Peace,” a 12‐hour rock music festival sponsored by “Peace Incorpo rated,” will be presented at Shea Stadium today from 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.
OUTSIDE SKOUN. Cambo dia, Aug. 5 (AP)—Seven Amer ican planes gave direct air sup port to Cambodian ground troops here today.
Sooner or later it was bound to happen — a picture about American motorcyclist supermen pitted against the Vietcong on enemy terrain. Brought together overseas by a wary Army command, these five super-tough civilians include two veterans of Vietnam. Their mission is to rescue a Presidential adviser held captive in a remote village."The Losers," opening yesterday on the circuits, has a good idea with some fine, ironic possibilities. And sure enough, this low-budget enterprise uses a slam-bang, blood-dripping massacre of a climax, spearheaded by these hardies, to stress the seeming futility of the war. The film also falls all over itself along the way in dawdling admiration of the bone-crushing quintet as symbols of rebellion.For a full hour — and we timed it — the recruits slam around an outpost town in typical cyclist-movie style, brawling, drinking and anchoring to the local brothel. Watching them cynically, unlike the camera, is a tough-talking Army captain, played by that excellent Negro actor, Bernie Hamilton, who finally gets them — and the show—on the road.Two sideline romances extend right to the front, with the secret-mission truck also carrying two girl friends, and we're not kidding. One of them, as a native girl with a Negro baby from the bordello, is beautifully played by a young Philippine actress named Ana Korita. Her stunned moment of reunion with the captain, who had deserted her, is the only genuinely touching thing in the picture.As for that climactic rescue, the boys roar into the thatched-hut village for an explosive holocaust, with blood flying, quite literally, at the slow-motion camera. The liberated "Presidential adviser" turns out to be a cringing, snapping man in a white-linen suit who denounces his burly rescuers as "trash," and leaves two of them to die—all five do. He then barks to the captain: "Now get me back to Washington so I can straighten out this mess."On one count, this project shows solid pluck. It was filmed entirely in the Philippines by an independent outfit called Fanfare. The exotic settings, stamped with harshly colored photography, look authentic every inch of the way. There is also evidence that the strapping William Smith, as the brightest of the five, can act. But the scenario by Alan Caillou and the limber direction of Jack Starrett (who also plays the Washingtonian) seem mainly concerned with one thing. War or no war, you can't push these guys around.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 5—Vice President Agnew accused two prominent Democrats today of “demeaning and deplorable” conduct in their recent apprais als of the Vietnam war policies during the Kennedy and John son Administrations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug 6 (AP)—The United States Com mand announced today that 78 Americans were killed in com bat last week, one more than, in the week before, and 6591 were wounded, 149 more than in the week before.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Aug. 6—Premier Souvanna Phouma said in an interview today that he was more optimistic about the possibility of peace talks with his half‐brother, Prince Soupha nouvong, leader of the Pathet Lao.
OAKLAND, Calif., Aug. 6—It took nearly two years, but they never lost their patience and they never stopped com ing.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 6 (Reuters)—South Viet namese war veterans prevented the destruction of their shantyH town dwellings today with a, violent attack on a Govern ment office and self‐inflicted wounds.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 6—Henry Cabot Lodge, President Nixon's personal representative to the Vatican, voiced optimism today about assistance from Pope Paul VI in securing im proved treatment of American prisoners of war in North Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 6—As Senate hearings continued on whether Congress had the right to free television time to ex plain its views, the Federal Communications Commission reasserted today the pre‐emi nent right of the broadcasting industry to decide which spokesmen and which ideas could use its facilities.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 6—You can hardly tune in the evening news these days without hear ing the low grumble of Senator Fulbright's voice. To hear him tell it, the world is in a terrible pickle, the State and Defense Departments are leading us to unimaginable disasters and the poor old Senate is helpless to save the Republic.
The banners that hung over the bleachers at Shea Stadium yesterday were peace signs as about 20,000 young people listened, clapped and danced to the resounding beat of rock music in a 12‐hour “festival for be‐ace.”
WASHINGTON, Aug. 6—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird reiterated today the Nix on Administration's contention that American planes were not giving close air support to Cam bodian troops despite eyewit ness press reports to the con trary.
David Bruce began his Vietnam peace mission Paris yesterday voicing hope “that we can avoid propa ganda and harsh language and settle down to business like discussion of the issues.” It was a short‐lived hope so far as the 78th session of these fateful negotiations was concerned.
PARIS, Aug. 6 — The new chief American negotiator at tended his first session of the peace talks on Vietnam today and proposed a renewed effort at settlement of the war. But the Communist side declared at this 78th meeting that he had nothing new to offer.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 7 (AP) — Lawrence F. O'Brien, the Democratic national chairman, has accused Vice President Ag new of making an “attack on me designed purposely as a smear filled with characteristic innuendo and insinuation.”
Activities. The President announced the appointment of Frank Borman, a former astronaut, as his special rep resentative on prisoners of war in Vietnam. The Presi dent met with members of the National Commission on Productivity and later gav? a reception in their honor. He saw Senator Jacob J. Javits, Republican of New York, and later met with officials of the National As sociation of Real Estate Boards.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 7 (AP) —President Nixon said today that he was sending the former astronaut Frank Borman on mission abroad to try to seek the release of United States prisoners of war in Southeast Asia and obtain humane treat ment for those who remain in enemy hands.
ST. LOUIS, Aug. 7—The Chief Justice of the United States, Warren E. Burger, told the chief justices of the states to day that “unseemly, outrageous episodes” in courtrooms and overly long trials were “under mining some of the public con fidence in the entire system.”
WASHINGTON, Aug. 8—Su preme Court Justice Hugo L. Black today denied without comment an appeal to stay court‐martial proceedings filed by a young Oklahoma marine accused of murder in South Vietnam. Pfc. Randall D. Her rod, of Calvin, Okla., had asked the Court to stay Army pro ceedings against him until his attorneys could file a petition for a writ of prohibition.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 7 (AP)—The South Viet namese Government announced stricter visa requirements for. Americans today. The move was believed aimed at keeping out antiwar groups and other per sons the Government regards as potential troublemakers or un desirables.
CHICAGO, Aug. 7 — Feder al Judge Julius J. Hoffman ruled today that logs of elec tronic surveillance of Bobby G. Seale chairman of the Black Panther party should be turned over to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.
NIAGARA FALLS, N. Y., Aug. 7—Thousands of youths bound for a rock music festival near Toronto have been refused entry into Canada at border crossings here and elsewhere because they could not produce enough money to support them selves during their stay.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 7—The Army is reverting to a pre Vietnam war policy that will allow a large number of col lege graduates in the Reserve Officer Training Corps to spend only three to six months on active duty instead of two years.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 7 (AP)—Three battalions of Cambodians trained by the United States Special Forces to day reinforced Government troops besieging the crossroads, town of Skoun 40 miles north, east of Pnompenh.
EUGENE, Ore., Aug. S—Dr. John R. Froines, who was ac quitted of conspiracy at the “Chicago 7” trial, has been re instated to the University of Oregon faculty in a decision that is likely to become a major issue as next year's session of the Oregon Legislature.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 8 — A House watchdog group told Secretary of State William P. Rogers today that the United States was paying three times more than it should to finance the war and the civilian econ omy in South Vietnam and de manded that he press for a de valuation of the South Vietna mese cur rency from 118 piasters to the dollar to at least 300 piasters.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 8—The United States mili tary command here has issued a confidential set of instruc tions to all unit commanders on what to say when asked about American air operations in Cambodia.

PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 8 (Reuters)—Several hundred Vietnamese refugees left here for saigon today in a 100‐car convoy essorted by Cambodian and South Vietnamese troups.
To the Editor:
HASTINGS ‐ON ‐HUDSON, N.Y., Aug. 8—Miss Deborah Florence Dickson, a medical social worker with the Ameri can Red Cross in Vietnam, will be married next month to. Capt. Victor Gerard Barnes, U.S.A.F., who re cently returned from a tour of duty in Thailand and Vietnam.
KALMAR, Sweden, Aug. 8 (UPI)—Fear of anti‐American demonstrations forced the can cellation of Sweden‐America Day in this southern Swedish town today for the first time since the early 1950's. Kalmar, a town of 35,000 persons, calls itself the home town of the majority of Swedish immi grants to the United States.
On Oct. 24, 1968, two weeks before the national elections, President Johnson demanded, and received, the resignation of Labor Secretary W. Willard Wirtz in a bitter disagreement over policy matters, including Vietnam, according to a forth coming book by George Chris tian, who was then Mr. John son's Press secretary.
REHOVOT, Israel, Aug. 8—The tension between the uni versal and the particular in Jewish religion, culture and pialitics evoked debate and some agreement this week among a group or American Jewish and Israeli intellectuals at the Weizmann Institute.
MONTROSE, Colo., Aug. 8—Capt. Ernest L. Medina buttoned up his military blouse with its three rows of ribbons, Combat Infantryman's Badge and para troop insignia as the small private airplane made its ap proach to the Montrose Airport.
DAKSEANG, South Vietnam, July 30 — The women among the 260 montagnard families sharing the dark, stifling bunk ers here say that they would not leave their husbands.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 9—Communist forces attacked three towns north and south of Pnompenh and another near the ancient temples of Angkor yes terday.
A “peace dividend” amount ing to $20‐billion to $24‐billion should be realized at the end of the war in Vietnam, accord ing to the National Industrial Conference Board.
Party Bossism Issue
WASHINGTON, Aug. 9—An official opinion poll commis sioned by the United States Information Agency in Europe and Asia disclosed that confi dence in the United States declined significantly overseas after the United States sent troops into Cambodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 10 (AP)—The U.S. com mand acknowledged today for the first time that Cambodians were flying aboard observation planes piloted by Americans to help spot targets for bombing strikes in Cambodia.
Twelve Democratic and two Republican Senators have ac cepted an offer of free time on noncommercial television to express their opposition to President Nixon's policies on the Indochina war.
ATLANTA, Aug. 10 (UPI)— A three‐judge Federal panel re fused today to take jurisdiction in two murder trials stemming from the alleged Mylai mas sacre of Vietnamese civilians two years ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 10 (AP) — Fighting be tween North and South Viet namese forces was reported to day in the mountains near an abandoned United States artil lery base named Ripcord in the northern part of South Vietnam. More than 1,000 enemy soldiers were believed to be massing for an attack on a South Viet namese base.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 10 — A dozen soldiers in combat gear lounged in a sand‐bagged bunker at Phuloi, north of Saigon, watching the opening segment of “Burke's Law” on their portable televi sion set. On the grass outside lay their grenades, ammunition beits and rifles.
PHUBAI, South Vietnam, Aug. 5—Faced with increasing, shortages of infantry riflemen, the United States Army com mand has suspended a long standing policy of permitting front‐line troops to re‐enlist in exchange for transfers from battlefields to rear areas.
OSAGE BEACH, Mo., Aug. 10 —If the nation's Governors are competent as political pundits, 1970 is not destined to be a year of sweeping Republican, gains.
ALBUQUERQUE, N. M., Aug. 11—Capt. Ernest L. Medina, expanding his version of events surrounding the alleged mas sacre of South Vietnamese at Songmy says that two of the murders he is charged with were committed by the South Vietnamese national police.
THE PRESIDENT
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Aug. 11 (AP)—The Army, rein forced by a Federal court de cision, moved today to resume its efforts to court‐martial Sgt. Esequiel Torres, one of the 12 soldiers charged in the alleged massacre at Songmy, South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 11— The Securities and Exchange Commission today petitioned the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia for a re hearing of the case involving the right of shareholders in a company to have public policy questions put before stock holder meetings.
The appearance of Senators opposed to President Nixon's Indochina war policies was fixed yesterday for 9 P.M. on Monday, Aug. 24, under the offer of National Educational Television to grant the doves free time on noncommercial television. The Senators are paying the production cost of the program, which will be carried locally by Channel 13.
Four members of the City Council plan to introduce a resolution committing the city to withholding the portion of Federal taxes that go toward financing the Vietnam war, Councilman Donald R. Mames said yesterday. The taxes would be a portion of those the city withholds from the pay of its employes.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Aug. 11—The soldiers have been dominating world events for the last few years, but the diplomats are stirring again. They are always in the awk ward position of having to an ticipate the future, to foresee the coming age, but they are beginning to think they can at least talk about the world be yond the present wars.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 11 (AP) — South Vietnamese troops supported by United States planes, battled today to repulse enemy soldiers threat ening an artillery and patrol camp near Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12 (AP)—Enemy troops attacked a South Vietnamese company manning an outpost 1,000 yards from a fire base today and hurled a tear‐gas shell into the embattled camp 27 miles west of Hue. The at tack was repulsed.
FORT MCPHERSON, Ga., Aug. 12 (AP)—A military judge rejected today constitutional challenges to a military trial for Sgt. Esequiel Torres, one of 12 soldiers charged with slay ing South Vietnamese civilians at Songmy in 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug, 12 — President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that only South Vietnam and Thailand could send troops to help Cam bodia and that the time to do so was now.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 12 (UPI) — The campus demon strations last spring after United States troops were sent into Cambodia did not surprise President Nixon, his daughter Mrs. David Eisen hower said today.
ST. LOUIS, Aug. 12—Mayor Lindsay 7 charged today‐that leaders in Washington were “engaged in a futile attempt to combat crime” through cheap methods.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 12 (UPI)—The Govern ment today confiscated editions of three Vietnamese‐language daily newspapers for alleged violations of the newspaper, code. Tin Sang, Dan and Anh Sang were seized for “printing articles harmful to the national security.”
Hijacking. President Nixon pledged United States coop eration in a proposed inter national program to stop hijackings.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 13 (AP) — The United States command reported to day that 85 Americans were killed in action in Indochina last week, seven more than the previous week and the highest weekly toll since before Ameri can ground forces withdrew from Cambodia on June 30.
On another sector of the political front, the latest Federal Communications Commission rulings are a partial and unsatisfactory response to the problem of fair access to television. The F.C.C. has upheld a sta tion's refusal to sell spot advertisements to Business Executives Move for Vietnam Peace and, by implica tion, to, any other organization which wants to buy time to engage in public controversy.
Rock fans who might he interested in such memorabil ia as the rose petals Mick Jagger threw to the audience at Madison Square Garden last Thanksgiving Day are in vited to an auction Oct. 12 at Fillmore East, for the benefit of peace candidates.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 13—The exodus of more than 200,000 South Vietnamese from Cambodia entered its final stage early this morning as 5,400 of the last refugees in camps began a journey down the Mekong River toward a country few of them had ever seen.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 13 (AP) —Contempt of Congress pro ceedings against a United States Communist party official for re fusing to testify on his con nections with the New Mobiliza tion Committee to End the War in Vietnam were recommended today by the House Committee on Internal Security. The recom mendation for the House to cite Arnold Johnson, the party's public relations director, was approved unanimously.
PARIS, Aug. 13—North Viet nam announced today that it was sending its chief delegate to the peace talks back to Paris.
WARSAW, Aug. 14 (AP)—Frank Borman, the former as tronaut who is now a special representative of President Nix on, held a half‐hour meeting at the Polish Foreign Ministry today on American prisoners of war in Vietnam. He said the re sponse “was full of sympathy and understanding of a difficult situation.” He leaves Warsaw for Stockholm Saturday and plans to visit Paris and Geneva.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 14—The Federal Communications Com mission said today that Presi dent Nixon had made such ex tensive use of television to de fend his conduct of the war in Indochina that the networks must now give opponents a chance to present critical re plies on prime time.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 14 (UPI)—Fourteen United States soliders were wounded today when enemy troops opened fire on a unit trying to rescue four soldires who had been wounded by a booby trap, military spokesmen reported.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Aug. 14 (UPI) — The court‐martial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., charged with murdering 102 Vietnamese civilians at Songmy in 1968, was postponed indef initely today.
MOSCOW, Aug. 15 (AP)—The Soviet newspaper Pravda today accused David K. E. Bruce and his United States negotiating team at the Paris peace talks of “stubbornly con tinuing deafness to the known realistic proposals” of Hanoi and the Vietcong.
WHAT kind of man would write a two‐hour show, without in termissions, chock full of scenes of what people apparently want to see today (nudity, fornication, homo sexuality, lesbianism, switch‐hitting, group gropes) interspersed with scenes of what people think they should see today (blasts against the war in Vietnam, air pollution, water pollution, urban blight, computerized conformity), call it “The Dirtiest Show in Town,” direct it himself, open it Off Off Broadway at Cafe La Mama, switch it to Off Broad way at the Astor Place Theater and sud denly find himself with the hottest show in town with a top ticket of $10?
GIABINH, South Vietnam, Aug. 8 — At night, the “Ruff Puffs” of this village in Trang bang district move out on pa trol, garbed, like the Vietcong, in black pajama‐like clothing or in shorts, but armed with American M‐16 rifles.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Aug. 15 (AP)—An 18‐year‐old United States marine was con victed today of the murder of 15 South Vietnamese women and children in a village south west of here last Feb. 19. He was sentenced to five years in prison.
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Aug. 15 (UPI) — The Army announced today that the initial pre‐trial hearing in the case of Specialist 4 Robert W. T'Souvas, who is charged in the Songmy massacre, would be held Aug. 26.
THE overriding issue in communications today reduces itself to a sin gle question: How to get access to the television screen? It's going to be the dominant issue for years, as evidenced in Senate hearings on the right of Congress to have automatic TV time for reply to the White House. And with the recent rulings of the Federal Communica tions Commission, petitions and court fights are virtually certain to bloom.
SAIGON—The coining of the monsoon rains has once more halted the Communist offensive in Laos by making the supply trails from North Vietnam im passable. By the dreary pattern that the seasons impose upon the war, the time was at hand last week for the government troops and the United States Air Force to reconquer what they lost before the rains.
A decade that began with the Bay of Pigs and is ending with 400.000 American troops still bogged down in Vietnam has raised disturbing questions about the quality of top Pentagon advice and the way crucial military decisions are made. These matters now have been starkly illuminated—and drastic pro posals made for change—in a Presidential panel's exhaustive study of the country's high command and the Defense Department which, it notes, have lost “the confidence of a significant segment of the American public.”
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15 (AP) —Gen. Ralph E. Haines Jr. has been named commanding gen eral of the Continental Army Command, succeeeding Gen. James K. Woolnough, who will retire, the Army said this week. General Hainei will be replaced as commander‐in‐chief, U. S. Army, Pacific, by Gen. William B. Rosson, deputy commander of U. S. forces in Vietnam. General Rosson's post will be taken by Lieut. Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, who has been nom inated for his fourth star.
ST. PAUL, Aug. 15 (AP)—After three hours of debate the 23d annual congress of the Na tional Student Association voted down early today a proposal calling for nonviolent civil dis obedience and for paralyzing Washington, D. C., May 1 unless the Vietnam war was ended. The vote was 150 to 134.
That Joseph Breed Jr. teaches painting probably would not surprise the G.I.'s who served with him three years ago at Tonsonnhut Air Base in South Vietnam.
HONG KONG, Aug. 15 (Reu ters)—North Vietnam today ac cused Japan of continuing on “the path of aggression pursued by the blood‐thirsty Japanese fascists in World War II.” In an article marking the 25th an niversary of Japan's defeat in the war, the official Hanoi daily Nhan Dan said the United States has revived Japanese militarism.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Aug. 15 (Agence France‐Presse)—De spite the war, Hanoi's news papers devote much of their space to sports„ literature, painting and food.
SAIGON.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 15 —The Nixon Administration has been around long enough now so that, if you don't mind get ting in a fight, you can gener alize about its personality.
WASHINGTON Aug. 16—A group of prominent attorneys and law professors has estab lished an organization to pro vide civilian counsel in Viet nam to American soldiers fac ing legal charges under the military code of justice.
SAIGON South Vietnam Aug 16 (AP)—North Vietnam ese troops shelled five allied bases near the demilitarized zone today and American B‐52's staged the heaviest raids in nearly two years, the United States command reported.
CULPEPER, Va., Aug. 10—Here in the soft, lush Virginia countryside two hours by car southwest of the Pentagon, lights are burning late each night at the offices of the American Security Council.
After an exceptionally dilatory session last year, the 91st Congress this year has been reasonably pro ductive. When the House of Representatives recessed Friday for nearly a month, it had acted on a lengthy list of important measures. The Senate remains session because its prolonged debates over Vietnam, Cambodia and the Carswell nomination to the Supreme Court have used up time which otherwise could have been devoted to ordinary legislative tasks.
Two New York Congressmen yesterday condemned the use of defoliants by American armed forces in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Aug. 16—A 21‐year‐old Amer ican Red Cross worker who arrived in Vietnam only two weeks ago was found dead of stab wounds early today in her quarters at Cuchi, 20 miles north of Saigon.
VIENTIANE, Laos, Aug 17 (Agence France‐Presse) — Talks between Government represen tatives and an envoy from the Communist‐led Pathet Lao have reached a stalemate, according to the envoy, Prince Tiao Souk Vongsak.
SAIGON. South Vietnam. Aug. 17 (AP) — B‐52 bombers struck the northern quarter of South Vietnam today in an at tempt to thwart what some allied officers said might be a big enemy offensive.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 17 (Agence France — Presse) —Two hundred Cambodian troops who were trained in South Vietnam were moved by helicopter today to the be leaguered provincial capital of Kompong Thom.
NEWARK, Aug. 17 (AP) —A 5‐foot‐6‐,inch civilian is find ing that although he had what it took to win a Bronze Star in Vietnam, he does not have what it takes to become a New ark policeman.
Activities. The President met with a delegation from the U. S. Catholic Conference studying problems of white ethnic minorities. Mr. Nixon also met with officers of the White House Correspondents Association and News Pho tographers Association. The President also had brief ap pointments with Lawrence Linn of the National Security Council staff; Jack R. Bailey, president of the National League of Postmasters and Brimmer Ehrler of the Na tional Association of Post masters; delegations of the ‘American Association of Re tired Persons, and members of the Justice Department who have worked on the D.C. crime bill.
MOSCOW, Aug. 17 (AP) —Tass, the Soviet press agency, said today that Mr. Agnew's speech “shows that the United States is going to keep its troops in Vietnam for an in definitely long time.” It said Mr. Agnew “virtually admitted that the Saigon regime is kept in power by U. S. bayonets.”
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Aug. 17—"Americans Go Home,” the posters say in Vietnamese.
SAIGON, Aug. 17 (Reuters) —The United States command reported today the loss of three UH‐1 helicopters in Laos but did not state why the helicop ters had been there.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17— President Nixon, who is try ing to improve his political image among Negro voters, is also preparing to replace Walter E. Washington, the black Mayor of the District of Columbia.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17—Vice President Agnew charged’ today that a Senate proposal for a fixed withdrawal of Amer ican troops from South Vietnam was “a blueprint for the first defeat in the history of the United States.”
They were academic All Americas, the players who scored in the classroom as well, as on the field, and they articu lated about their two‐week trip to Vietnam, and a summer with the hard hats, and Texas poli ticians, and their fears about the “potentially big problems” that await college football this fall.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 17—Following are excerpts from a speech today by Vice Presi dent Agnew before the con vention in Miami of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, a copy of which was made available here!I would like to speak to you today of a rising threat to everything our servicemen have fought to accomplish in Southeast Asia—a threat embodied in the Hatfield McGovern amendment.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 17 (AP)—The United States mission in Vietnam, in a move aimed at encouraging civilian advisers to serve here, has quietly dropped the five‐year‐old prohibition against the advisers bring ing their wives to Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 18 (AP) —A State Department spokes man described today as untrue charges that the United States has moved South Vietnamese troops into southern Laos.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 18 (AP)—North Vietnam ese troops were staid to have attacked a South Vietnamese force near a fire base 27 miles west of Hue today, but heavy rains reduced ground action elsewhere in South Vietnam's northernmost provinces.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 18 (UPI) — A former Marine sergeant told a Senate sub committee today that his objec tions to marijuana smoking so infuriated men under his com mand in Vietnam that one tried to murder him with a hand grenade.
CHEYENNE, Wyo., Aug. 18 (AP)—Senator Gale McGee, a backer of United States policy in Vietnam, defeated a peace candidate i the Democratic pri‐1 mary today to win renomina tion to a third term.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 18—Dean Burch, chairman of the Federal Communications Com mission, emphasized today that the agency's order requiring the television networks to give prime‐time exposure to critics of the Administration's policy in Vietnam was not a grant of “equal time” to match Pres ident Nixon's appearances.
No doubt people, like George Christian and Louis Heren, who weathered the direct blasts of Lyndon B. Johnson's personality, will not soon forget him. (Mr. Heren tells the archetypal Johnson story in his de scription of how the former President once made extensive use of Heren's knee and lower thigh to illustrate a comparison of the Vietcong “to a young man trying to seduce a girl.”) But for those of us who experienced nothing more of Lyndon Johnson than the wooden TV performances and the graceless rhetoric, all sense of the man has faded with remarkable speed. And since surely (common sense tells us) he could not have been as awful as devil theorists and angry caricaturists once made him out to be, one approaches these two books with an open, if not quite blank, mind and a high quotient of curiosity.
The Police Department defend ed itself yesterday against charges by Mayor Lindsay that it had failed to handle properly the violent skirmishes last May between construction workers and students protesting the United States involvement in Cambodia.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Aug. 18 (Agence France‐Presse)—In the presence of a delegation from the American Black Pan ther party led by Eldridge, Cleaver, North Vietnam cele brated an “international day of solidarity with the black peo ple of the United States” today.
CANBERRA, Australia, Aug. 18 (Reuters)—The Government said today that it would with draw a battalion of troops from South Vietnam, but would offer Saigon a direct grant of 3.3 mil lion Australian dollars (about $3.6‐million) as “defense aid.”
HONG KONG, Aug. 18 (Reu ters) — The pro‐Communist Pathet Lao leader, Prince Souphanouvong, has accused the Laotian Government of Pre mier Souvanna Phouma of in troducing South Vietnamese troops into Laos.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 18—For many months now, the Nixon Administration has been debat ing privately the best way to make the South Vietnamese take over the defense of their country and speed up the with drawal of the American expedi tionary force. Should the Saigon regime be assured of Washing ton's support indefinitely, or should it be told, publicly or privately, that the American troops would be called home by a certain date?
WASHINGTON, Aug. 18—Following are excerpts from the text of Senator Mark 0. Hatfield's floor speech today replying to Vice President Agnew:
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Aug. 18 (UPI)—The military attorney for Pvt. Gerald Srhith, charged with murder and indecent as sault in the alleged massacre of Vietnamese civilians in Songmy in 1968, asked today that his case be tried in Viet nam.
THANHMY, South Vietnam—In June this small community was only a dark smudge on the earth after a Vietcong massacre.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 19 (UPI) —Masked and unidentified to unsure anonymity before tele vision cameras, former service men testified today of near tragedy resulting from the use of marijuana and other drugs in the United States, Vietnam and Korea.
HARTFORD, Aug. 19 — The Rev. Joseph Daniel Duffey, who won the Democratic primary for the United States Senate tonight, was thought of as the “peace candidate” when he started campaigning last fall.
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Aug. 19 (AP)—The Army an nounced today it was drop ping charges against S. Sgt. Kenneth L. Hodges, one of 12 men charged in the killings at Songmy.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 19—Attorney General John N. Mitchell said today that shifting school desegregation decisions had made “yo‐yo's” out of some students in the South, and he expressed the hope that the Su preme Court would not impose “racial balance” requirements during the coming school year.
To the Editor: In “A Report on New York City's Options for Cable Tele vision Franchises” the Urban Technology of the Vera Insti tute of Justice has encouraged community ‐oriented C.A.T.V. programing. However, a re lated area, the provision of C.A.T.V. service to low income neighborhoods and families is completely ignored in the report.If C.A.T.V. were purely consumption good it would be justifiable to permit lower in come families to choose be tween C.A.T.V. service and other consumption; the broader community's interests would be adequately served through direct income redistributions, e.g., public welfare. However, as the Vera report strongly implies, C.A.T.V. is not purely an individual consumption commodity.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Thursday, (UPI) Aug. 20— A military spokesman said that a force estimated at 3,000 North Vietnamese regulars launched a heavy attack early today against the outer defenses of Pnompenh. He said casualties had been heavy on both sides.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 19—Allied officials here say that South Vietnamese ground forces have made a surprisingly good showing in their current offensive against North Vietnamese base areas in the country's northernmost provinces.
PITTSBURGH, Aug. 19 Longhairs won a victory here today when the American Fed eration of Teachers voted at its national convention to support a student's choice of his own “dress and grooming.”
PARIS, Aug. 20 — After at tending two sessions of what he called a renewed effort to reach a Vietnam settlement, David K. E. Bruce, the new chief American negotiator at the peace talks here, stayed away today from the 80th plenary meeting.
AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Aug. 20—Prime Minister Sir Keith Holyoake said today that New Zealand intended to with draw an infantry company of 144 men from South Vietnam before the end of the year. The present strength of New Zea landers is two infantry corn panies, commando troops and an artillery battery, a total of 550 men.
SAIGON South Vietnam, Aug. 20 (Reuters)—President Nguyen Van Thieu announced a shake up tonight in the South Vietna mese military high command.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 20—The Senate voted today to bar the United States from paying larger allowances to allied troops in Vietnam than it pays to American soldiers.
GENEVA, Aug. 20—Frank Borman, the former astronaut who is now a special envoy of President Nixon, discussed with officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross today the fate of United States prisoners of war in Southeast Asia, particularly North Viet nam. Mr. Borman arrived here yesterday from Paris and con tinued on today to Belgrade, Yugoslavia, on his global trip.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 20 (AP) — The United States command reported today that 69 Americans were killed in combat last week, 16 fewer than the week before.
JERUSALEM, Aug. 20—The Israeli Government has for mally notified the United Na tions that it is ready to begin negotiations with the United Arab Republic and Jordan on a Middle Eastern settlement, the Foreign Ministry announced today.
HARTFORD, Aug. 20— This has not been, and almost cer tainly will not be, a banner year for antiwar candidates or leftist liberals. A few peace candidates have done well, notably Bella S. Abzug who defeated Leonard, Farbstein in the Congressional district encompassing Manhat tan's West Side and Lower East Side, and Ronald V. Dellums, who unseated Repre sentative Jeffrey Cohelan in the Berkeley ‐Oakland district of northern California.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 20 The Democratic National Com mittee and the Columbia Broad casting System appealed to gether to the Federal Com munications Commission today to reconsider its ruling that Republicans must have a chance to answer the Democrats’ “loyal opposition” broadcast on C.B.S. last month.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 21—Enemy forces fired mortar shells into Government positions on the west bank the Mekong River last night, just a mile from the capital's royal palace, the Cambodian military command said today. The shelling was the closest to the capital reported since the Cambodian war began four months ago.
MOSCOW, Aug. 21 — The seven Warsaw Pact nations to day praised the new Soviet West German treaty and pledged their “firm intention” to step up efforts to strengthen security in Europe.
LOS ANGELES — They called him the Republican party's lightning rod, the target of bolts of Democratic anger and frus tration, the man who, at the President's request, took on the role of White House political spokesman with such vengeance that even some in his own party cautioned against his inflamma tory rhetoric. He was, after all, coming close to accusing im portant leaders of the opposition of harboring sinister — perhaps even traitorous — designs.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 22 (Reuters)—The United States will give South Vietnam 150,000 tons of rice worth $25 million under a new agreement signed in Saigon today. The rice is being donated under the Food for Peace program and is the second 150,000‐ton rice gift this Year.
SAIGON—Early in 1969, when the Nixon Administration was minting the word “Vietnamiza tion,” top American advisors in South Vietnam would argue that their job was to upgrade the Saigon armed forces enough to defend the people not against the North Vietnamese Army, but rather against the Vietcong.
WASHINGTON — The Govern ment made a decision last week in the politically sensitive area of oil, and there was a more or less automatic assumption that the reason was political—specifi cally to help some Republicans.
SAIGON — They're off and walking in South Vietnam's Sen atorial election, the last signifi cant countrywide balloting be fore the Presidential election in fall 1971.
The Metropolitan Life In surance Company has an nounced the appointment of Chester L. Fisher Jr., as vice president and director of ur ban and environmental af fairs on Sent. 1.
The manuscripts of two ir reverent essays about marriage and education written in 1931 by Bertrand Russell are part of a literary auction planned by Publishers for Peace, a group organized within the book In dustry opposed to the war hi Indochina.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif, Aug. 22—President Nixon today for mally dispatched Vice President Agnew on a 30,000‐mile tour of four friendly Asian allies to assure them that the United States in Mr. Nixon's words, “is not withdrawing from Asia.”
PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 22—Law‐enforcement officials are attempting to head off a pos sible confrontation between the antiwar movement and 14,000 American Legionnaires who are expected at their national con vention here next week.
FORT PIERCE, Fla., Aug. 22 (AP)—The mother of a black soldier killed in Vietnam says she is determined to have him buried in a plot given to her in an all‐white cemetery by a 72‐year‐old white woman.
WASHINGTON — Among the prerogatives of the Presi dent, the informal power to com mand the attention of television networks and their vast prime time audiences ranks somewhere close to his constitutional power to command the troops.
HARTFORD — Steadily the votes mounted for the Rev. Joseph D. Duffey. He never dropped behind, and by the end of the evening the Protestant minister, who had been against the war in Vietnam long before that was the vogue, had won the Democratic Senate nomination in Connecticut by a wide margin.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Aug. 22 (UPI)—A young Okla homa marine pleaded not silty today to charges he ordered the killing of five Vjetnamese women and 11 children in the village of Santhane last February.
To the Editor:
WASHINGTON, Aug. 22 (AP) — Representative Roger H. Zion, Republican of Indiana, said today he will fly to Paris on Monday with an appeal signed by 406 of the 435 House members for more humane treatment of United States prisoners of war. He is sched uled to deliver the letter to the North Vietnamese delegation after a brief talk with the chief United States negotiator at the Paris peace talks, David K. E. Bruce.
SEOUL, South Korea, Aug. 22 —South Korean officials re acted sharply to the United States Senate's call for a drastic cut in special allowances paid by the United States to South Korean and Thai troops in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 22 (AP) —A judge has turned back, mo mentarily, an appeal by peace groups for equal space in the Capitol crypt next to a huge prisoner‐of‐war display donated by a Texas millionaire.
HUNTSVILLE, Ma., Aug. 22 (UPI)—A pretrial hearing into the court‐martial of M. Sgt. William A. Higdon, charged with irregularities in the opera tion of a servicemen's club in Vietnam, will be held tomorrow at the Redstone Arsenal.
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich., Aug. 23 (UPI)—Michigan Democrats endorsed today the concept of granting amnesty to all ‘ per sons who have dodged the draft by either going to jail or leaving the country. The party's state convention passed the resolution less than 12 hours after it had passed another one calling for an immediate cease fire in Indochina and removal of all American forces by Christmas.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Aug. 23 (UPI)—The White House said today that Vice President Ag new's remarks linking United States interests in Asia to the stability of the Cambodian Gov ernment represented no change in the Nixon Administration's policy.
FORT PIERCE, Fla., Aug. 23 (AP)—A soldier killed in Vietnam, who was rejected by a cemetery because he was black, was given military and religious honors at an armory today and then carried to a mortuary.
SAIGON, Aug. 23 (AP)—In formed sources said today that the United States Air Force was closing a major fighter bomber base in South Vietnam withdrawing nearly 100 super sonic jets, and was planning to shut down another important base in Thailand.
The Federal Communications Commission's land mark interpretation of the fairness doctrine—holding that it can be applied even to the President of the United States on such an overriding issue of contro versy as the Vietnam war—is a logical and mature extension of a principle that goes to the heart licensed broadcasting in this country.
TOKYO, Aug. 23 (UPI) —Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's chief delegate to the Vietnam peace talks, left Hanoi last Wednesday for Paris, Hanoi's Vietnam News Agency said to day in a broadcast monitored here.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Monday, Aug. 24—A Cambo dian military spokesman said today that allied air strikes had killed 500 North Vietnam ese and Vietcong soldiers in a sanctuary along the border with South Vietnam.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Aug. 23 (UPI)—First Lieut. William L. Calley, the first of 12 men charged in the alleged Songmy massacre, will face a second pretrial hearing tomorrow. Lieu tenent Calley, accused of the murder of 102 Vietnamese civil ians, was to have been brought to court‐martial on the charges tomorrow, but the trial was postponed a week ago so that a military judge could hear de fense motions seeking access to prosecution material.
OTTAWA, Aug. 23—Secretary General Thant of the United Nations told a congress of World Federalists tonight that mankind must soon solve its problems of rising population, increasing pollution and a “mul tiplied capacity of destruction” or perish.
AGANA, Guam, Aug. 23—Vice President Agnew warned today that it would be impos sible for United States combat troops to pull out of South Vietnam if the Communists overthrew the Government of Premier Lon Nol and took over Cambodia.
VIRGINIA BEACH, Va.—They wait, and often they weep. Especially when they see a Navy jet flying overhead.
PHUOCVINH, South Viet nam, Aug. 22 — This war sounds different from the others. It has the usual snaps of rifle fire and booms of artillery at varying intervals, but above these is a caco phony of whirrs and putts provided by this war's jeep —the helicopter.
MADISON, Wis., Aug. 24—An explosion that the police said was caused by a bomb ripped through the Army Math ematics Research Center on the University of Wisconsin cam pus early today, killing a gradu ate student and injuring four other persons.
SEOUL, South Korea, Aug. 24 —Vice President Agnew pledged today that the Nixon Adminis tration would provide funds to modernize South Korea's 600, 000‐man armed forces.
"Eldridge Cleaver," which opened, without warning, at Cinema II yesterday, is a generally intelligent, wholly sympathetic treatment of the thoughts and personality of Eldridge Cleaver in exile in Algiers. Its apparent aim is not so much to study Cleaver as to provide access to his thoughts and his voice, but in doing this it necessarily does study him. Insofar as Cleaver is the subject, the film is thoughtful, ironic, valuable. Insofar as Johnson, Reagan, Nixon, Agnew and the "crimes of American imperialism" are the subjects, the film is very tired and very ordinary propaganda.Directed by William Klein ("Mr. Freedom," "Float Like a Butterfly, Sting Like a Bee," an episode of "Far From Vietnam"), the film consists at its best of interviews with and scenes from Cleaver's Algerian exile. It includes excellent footage of the First Pan-African Cultural Festival, at which Cleaver spoke, and material from Vietnam, from protest marches and beatings in the United States. It is divided into thought-segments introduced by titles (for example, "Culture Is a Gun") flashed on the screen, in the manner of some recent Jean-Luc Godard propaganda movies.However, "Eldridge Cleaver" is sufficiently unassertive in its approach to the man to allow his mind and what he has to say essential control—to a degree, even undercutting the more strident rhetoric of some of its images. As he discusses the revolutionary aims and methods of the Panthers, contemplates exile (with rather too desultory a subjective camera exploring the alleys of Algiers), meets African nationalists, laments the captivity in Babylon (the United States) — he emerges as a man of considerable wit, grace, personal sadness and hard-headed realism.Although he advocates an orthodox revolutionary toughness ("So far as I'm concerned, the neutrals are part of the problem."), he rejects black racism in favor of an internationalism of the oppressed that, if short on analysis, is also short on the appeals to anti-American paranoia that seem so often to motivate "third-world" indignation.At one point, Cleaver is shown visiting the North Vietnam delegation in Algiers. Through an interpreter he exchanges friendly views. And before he leaves he poses for Klein's camera, holding hands with the Vietnamese, whom he dwarfs but with whom he seems formally at ease. It is a moment of shy warmth and slightly awkward good feeling, and it is not too atypical of the best film-making in "Eldridge Cleaver."
HANOI, North Vietnam, Aug. 24 (Agence France‐Presse)—Eldridge Cleaver in a speech here has denounced what he described as President Nixon's doctrine of “making Asians fight Asians.”
Harry Pesin is president of a small New York ad agency and a man who decided that he'd rather live in California. So he pulled up stakes a couple of months ago, moved into a home in La Jolla and now runs his shop long‐dis tance style.
In what may be an omen of a colorful campaign to come, a Manhattan Republican Con gressional candidate delivered to his opponent yesterday the customary debate challenge and a hardly customary dozen red roses.
To the Editor: Spiro Agnew's Aug. 17 re marks before the Veterans of Foreign Wars in Miami Beach are starkly illustrative of the brazenly immature attitude of the Nixon Administration. His reference to the Hatfield‐Mc Govern amendment as “a blue print for the first defeat in the history of the United States” was a blatant appeal to the very worst of all those emotions which sometimes pass for pa triotism in this confused and troubled day.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Aug. 24 (UPI) — Defense attorneys sought today the disclosure of what they termed key and classified info nation that might shed further light on the alleged massacre at Songmy in 1968 and the secretive Oper ation Phoenix.
MIAMI, Aug. 24 (AP)—A suit supported by the Federal Gov ernment was filed in United States District Court today, seeking to force an all‐white cemetery in Fort Pierce, Fla., to allow the burial of a black sol dier killed in Vietnam.
WASHINGTON—The boss is away but the official mice are not playing in Washington. They are worrying about the endless frustrations of Vietnam, not so much about the military situation, but about the con sequences of what they regard as their growing successes in Southeast Asia.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Aug. 25 (Agence France‐Presse)—Most of the defense forces of Pnompenh were reported to have been shipped across the flood‐swollen Mekong River to day to oppose a suspected heavy concentration of North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops.
PARIS, Aug. 25 (AP)—Xuan Thuy, North Vietnam's chief ne gotiator at the Vietnam peace talks, will arrive here tomorrow from Moscow, his office an nounced today.
LONDON, Aug. 25—Short of seeing Judge Julius Hoffman re enact his famous role in the film of the Chicago conspiracy trial—a film its defendants are hop ing to make—one could not ask for better casting than William Burroughs who presided at the one‐night performance here of John Burgess's verbatim docu mentary “Chicago/Conspiracy” at the Open Space Theater.
TICONDEROGA, N. Y., Aug. 25— Governor Rockefeller said today that Senator Charles E. Goodell faced a diffi cult election campaign because of his strong criticism of Presi dent Nixons conduct of the war in Vietnam.
STOCKHOLM, Aug. 25 (AP)—A young American who said he defected from the Marines and fought for the Vietcong arrived in Stockholm with a North Vietnamese passport today and asked for political asy lum.
SAN CLEMENTE, Aug. 25—For the third consecutive day, a remark by Vice President Agnew that the United States would “do everything” to in sure the survival of the Lon Nol regime in Cambodia touched off debate and ques tioning here today. The con fusion created by that comment was only partly resolved.
PARIS, Aug. 25 (AP)—Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the de posed Cambodian leader, said in an interview published here today that two‐thirds of Cam bodia was in the hands of his supporters.
Both White House and State Department insist that Vice President Agnew did not change Administration policy on Cambodia when he said: “We're going to do everything we can to help the Lon Nol Government.” But, when coupled with his implication that a Commu nist takeover in Cambodia would make it impossible to withdraw American troops from Vietnam, that assertion certainly bears scant resemblance to what Administration leaders have said before.
To the Editor:
PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 25—Mayor Lindsay told the Na tional Municipal League today that “there could be a decent environment if Washington de cided to change its priorities.”
SAIGON. South Vietnam. Aug. 25 (UPI) — President Nguyen Van Thieu said today that he had asked the United States to increase its economic aid while pulling not American troops.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 25 (UPI) —The Senate, imposing a limi. tation of six hours on debate today scheduled for next Tues day a vote on its controversial “amendment to end the war.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Aug. 27 (AP)—A big United States Army helicopter carrying about 25 persons was shot down yesterday and fell into an American position, the United States command said today. Initial reports said two Americans had been killed, sev en had been wounded and 30 were missing.
PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 26 —State and city officials prepared today for an expected con frontation with radical groups that have threatened to disrupt the American Legion's national convention here.
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Aug. 26 (UPI) — Attorneys for a young soldier charged with the murder of South Vietnamese civilians asked today that legal proceedings against their client be moved from “this antiseptic courtroom” to Mylai 4. The hamlet is in the village of Songmy, Vietnam, where the al leged massacre occurred on March 16, 1968.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 26—The Senate defeated today two more amendments to the mili tary procurement bill that it has been wrestling with for five weeks.
PARIS, Aug. 26—Xuan Thuy, Hanoi's chief delegate at the Vietnam peace negotiations, re turned here today after a three month absence and appeared open to suggestions for a re newal of secret talks with the United States.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 26 (UPI) — American artillerymen shelled a United States unit by mistake killing two G.I.'s and a Vietcong sol dier who had defected, the United States command said today.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Thurs day, Aug. 27 (Reuters)—Thailand has begun nego tiations with the Saigon Government for the with drawal of the 12,000 Thai combat troops serving in South Vietnam, Premier Tha nom Kittikachorn said to day.
To the Editor: In our exhaustive search for a scintillating panacea to re solve our welfare problems, would appear that we inten tionally deny some century‐old truths which are the only basis for the solutions to the prob lems.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 26—Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that the Soviet Union had conducted first tests of warheads on its principal intercontinental bal listic missile, the SS‐11.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Aug. 27—Vice Presi dent Agnew told President Chung Hee Park of South Korea yesterday, before traveling on to Taiwan and South Vietnam, that all American troops would be withdrawn from South Korea when that country's armed forces were fully modernized—,perhaps In five years or more.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Aug. 26—Authoritative White House sources have declared that the United States is prepared to join the Soviet Union in a two nation peace‐keeping force to maintain a settlement of the Middle East conflict.
PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 27—City officials and spokesmen for a war protest group an nounced today an agreement that will permit two antiwar parades at the time of the American Legion convention here next week.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Aug. 28 (AP)—Vice Presi dent Agnew lauded the South Vietnamese people today for suffering “so much in freedom's cause” and he pledged again that “there will be no lessen ing” of American support.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 27—Proposed legislation to bar the United States from developing missiles capable of making, nuclear first strike against con crete Soviet missile silos was dropped by its Senate sponsor today when defeat appeared certain.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Aug. 27 (AP) — A marine private took the stand in his own defense today and denied that the 16 Vietnamese women and children he and his patrol killed last Feb. 19 were mur dered.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 25—WAR, says the metal disk on the necklace of a gung‐ho marine, his face streaked with black and green greasepaint for reconnais sance.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 27 (UPI) —The Defense Department an nounced today that Cpl. John C. Hines, a marine, of Troy, N. Y., had been killed in action in Vietnam.
When the Nixon Adminis tration took up residence in Washington, It was widely assumed that a new cordial ity would crop up between the Government and the fi nancial community. After all, Richard M. Nixon had been a Wall Street lawyer, with of fices at 20 Broad Street, and a law partner named John N. Mitchell, now the Attorney General.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Fri day, Aug. 28—Vice President Agnew flew‐into the capital of Cambodia today, presumably to assure the Government of Premier Lon Nol of United States support.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 27—The campaign work ers sat around the table at par ty headquarters. Their leader urged them on and advised that they “concentrate on areas where we have support, and forget the others.” On the walls were charts of key voting dis tricts, next to the party's sym bol, the Star of Bethlehem.
SAIGON, Aug. 27 (AP)—Only two Americans were reported today to haVe survived the crash yesterday of an Army Chinook helicopter carrying 27 infantrymen and a crew of five.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 27 — The United States command reported today that 52 Americans died in combat in Indochina last week, for the lowest toll in three and a half years.
PARIS, Aug. 27—Xuan Thuy, Hanoi's chief delegate to the Vietnam peace talks, who re turned here yesterday after three‐month absence, stayed away from today's session of the negotiations.
LOS ANGELES, Aug. 27 (UPI) — President Nixon and 27 Cabinet officials and wives flew here today from the Western White House for dinner‐reception followed by an evening of light opera at the Music Center.
MIAMI, Aug. 27 — A Federal District Court here today or dered a cemetery in Fort Pierce to accept for burial the body of a black Vietnam veteran whose coffin had been turned away because of a charter that restricted the cemetery to whites.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 27 — Helicopters and planes still arrive daily at remote corner of Tansonnhut Airfield carrying the bodies of United States soldiers, sailors and airmen.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 28 —Thailand has informed the United States that she intends to withdraw her 11,000‐man force from South Vietnam, the State Department said today.
PARIS, Aug. 28 — The Viet nam peace talks appear to have entered a new exploratory phase as a result of the ap pointment of David K. E. Bruce as chief United States nego tiator.
FORT CARSON, Colo., Aug 28 (UPI)—Walter Lee Martin became a soldier when he was 12 years old.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Saturday, Aug. 29 (AP) — A convoy of American infantry men was ambushed on a main highway in jungles in the Central Highlands and in nearly 10 hours of fighting 6 were killed and 26 were wounded, the United States command reported today.
In the next two months the off‐year. Congressional elections will produce the greatest out pouring of young political workers in our history. The Children's Crusade has not been decimated, far from it. The ranks of the young in poli tics have swelled and they are now fixtures in many cam paigns.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Aug. 28 — President Nguyen Van Thieu handed out the first land titles to peasants today under the land‐reform program he signed into law five months ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Aug. 28—In a dusty hamlet of a suburban district of Sai gon, with the usual abund ance of chickens, children, palm trees and flies, a candi date for the senatorial elec tion on Sunday came to meet and to sway the voters.
HONG KONG. Aug. 28 (Reu ters)—North Vietnam conceded today that war had heavily damaged its “already very poor and backward” economy but it gave no sign of retreating in the Indochina conflict.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia Aug. 28—Vice President Agnew told Premier Lon Nol of Cambodia today that the United States would supply his country with money and arms but would not send American troops to her defense.
WASHINGTON—The Ameri can way of death has always included a considerable meas ure of racial segregation. Yet a ripple of indignation spread across the country last week when a black soldier killed in Vietnam was denied burial in a “Caucasian‐only” Florida ceme tery.
MOSCOW, Aug. 29—Lyud mila A. Gvishiani, the daughter of Premier Aleksei N. Kosygin, asserts in a book just published that United States policy in Vietnam had its roots in the early American relations with the Soviet State.
FORT PIERCE, Fla., Aug. 29—A black soldier who died in Vietnam and lay in a cof fin while lawyers battled over his funeral was buried in an all‐white cemetery to day as some white grave owners threatened to remove their relatives’ bodies.
SAIGON — “The security sit uation in Lainghi hamlet has de teriorated seriously since the withdrawal of its Revolutionary Development team and Popular Force platoon. With the excep tion of eight Popular Self‐De fense cadre‐there are no forces whatsoever in this hamlet at night. Although the hamlet is situated immediately in front of the ROK [Republic of Korea] battalion access road and com pound, the Koreans apparently contribute nothing to the ham let's security.
PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 29—Three persons have been ar rested on gun‐law violations after an arsenal was uncovered in a raid on White Panther headquarters here, the police said today.
The trouble with President Nixon is that he is not con servative enough.
SAN CLEMENTE, Calif., Aug. 29—Quietly but with relish and a sense of excitement, White House staff members have formed a small organization of seasoned political strategists to help elect Republican candi dates this fall.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Aug. 30 (AP) — Enemy troops attacked a Buddhist or phanage and temple south of Danang today, killing 15 South Vietnamese and wounding 45, a Government spokesman re ported. He said that most of the victims had been orphans.
To the Editor:
DANANG, South Vietnam, Sunday, Aug. 30 (AP) — Pvt. Randell D. Herrod of the United States Marines was acquitted today of murder in the deaths of 16 South Vietnamese women and children.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Aug. 29 (Agence France Presse)—The military com mand circular clearly spelled out the danger for combat troops: be careful when you salvage enemy ammunition, it may be booby‐trapped.
LOS ANGELES, Aug. 29 (AP) —Rioting broke out today among 7,000 persons at a Mexican‐American antiwar rally in East Los Angeles. Demonstra tors burned buildings, smashed store windows and injured policemen.
ISLA VISTA, Calif.
SPRINGFIELD, III., Aug. 29 (UPI)—The Selective Service director, Dr. Curtis W. Tarr, says there is little chance the country will move to an all‐volunteer military force before the end of the Viet nam war. “I think it would be prudent not to attempt an all‐volunteer force until we have withdrawn all of our forces from Vietnam,” he told a news conference yesterday on a brief visit to the Illinois Selec tive Service headquarters here.
PRINCETON, N. J., Aug. 29 —The Democratic party, has a substantial lead over the Re publicans among those taking sides in a Gallup Poll as the party “best able to handle the top problem” of the United States.
Now that more foreign plays are being staged in their original form for American audi ences, simultaneous transla tion has assumed consider able importance. It has, as well, stirred up some con troversy. The problem, like withdrawing from Vietnam or being all things to all men, is of labyrinthine complexity. How, in short, can an Amer ican audience understand plays from Japan, France, Poland, Russia, Thailand?
For Senators Gaylord Nelson, Wisconsin Democrat, and Charles Goodell, New York Republican, the issue was primarily a moral one the United States should stop using herbicides in Vietnam.They, introduced an amendment denying any further funds for the plant‐killing program. “In a little more than eight years,” Mr. Nel son said in the Senate last week, “the United States has sprayed more, than 100 million pounds of assorted herbicide chemicals [over Vietnam]... six pounds for every man,, woman and child in that country. If our role is to defend Viettiam, how can we risk de stroying the environment in which they must survive when we leave?”
BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 29—Vice President Agnew has assured the leaders of Thailand that he will “leave no stone unturned” to make certain that implementation of the so called Nixon doctrine is not blocked by American critics, according to the Thai Foreign Minister, Thanat Khoman.
The renewed prospect of secret talks for the first time in a year, now that North Vietnam has joined the United States in sending a high‐level negotiator back to Paris, is important—but much more impor tant is whether either side has anything new to say. There is an opportunity for a new initiative that neither Washington nor Hanoi would be wise to ignore.
To the Editor: I have been wading through news reports, editorials and television accounts about the current crisis in the Tombs and other city houses of detention in hopes of finding one refer ence to the deplorable bail sys tem in New York City. My search has been in vain; the money bail system remains as untouchable as motherhood.
TOKYO, Aug. 30 (UPI) —Kyodo News Agency said to day that Japan would seek to improve her relations with North Vietnam soon in an at tempt to bring peace to Indo china.
Robert Showalter of Crete, Ill., yesterday was elected na tional commander of the 250,000 member American Veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam, the AMVETS. He was elected at the organization's 26th annual convention at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel.
WASHINGTON — It is not easy to hide a B‐52. Nor is it possible to conceal—as anyone who has flown over the jungles of Vietnam in a helicopter can plainly see— the moon‐craters caused by each plane's thirty ton bombload. Long after the war is a dying memory, these holes in the landscape of four countries in Southeast Asia will remain as reminders of. the American way of life and death.
The Senate will vote tomorrow on the Hatfield McGovern amendment to set a timetable for ending the war in Vietnam, an objective devoutly wished by millions of Americans. The framers of the measure have labored responsibly and creatively to,extend the deadline for withdrawal of American forces and allow the President flexibility In applying that dead line.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 30 —Nicholas Johnson, a member of the Federal Communications Commission, said today that every time the President spoke to the nation on television, the networks should give com parable treatment to opposite views
Senator Charles E. Goodell charged yesterday that his Democratic rival, Richard L. Ottinger, was a late opponent of the war in Vietnam, where as he said he had “stood alone” last fall in making “the first attempt to legislate an end to the war.”
HONOLULU, Aug. 30—Vice President Agnew, heading home today from a tour of five Asian nations, said that more than half the Communist combat forces in Cambodia “have been elimina ted.”
LOS ANGELES, Aug. 30—A force of 330 sheriff's deputies patrolled the East Los Angeles Mexican‐American community today after an antiwar demon stration erupted into a riot yes terday. The riot caused one death, at least 53 injuries and extensive. property damage.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Aug. 30—Several,million South Vietnamese elected 30 Senators today in voting marked by ter rorist attacks in some areas and charges of fraud in others.
George Meany, president of the A.F.L.‐CI.O., says that the Democratic party “has disinte grated” and that trade union ists are no longer as attracted to it as they have been in the past.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 30 (UPI)—A newly organized group of antiwar graduates of the nation's armed‐service aca demies has opened a drive to convince Americans that “the only honorable peace now is to admit our mistake and get out” of Vietnam.
PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 30—About 1,000 persons turned out today to march through down town Portland in the widely heralded “Victory to the Viet namese People” parade and to protest the American Legion national convention in progress here.
PARIS, Nov. 30 — North Vietnam indicated tonight that it might not oppose internation al supervision of elections in South Vietnam if they were held under a coalition govern merit — a government that the Communists are trying to pro mote in place of the present one in Saigon. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 30—People not lucky enough to have Pentagon folks living in their neighborhoods were probably puzzled last week when Secretary Laird called the bombing of North Vietnam a protective re action. Didn't our planes bomb the bejeebers out of North Vietnam? they probably asked. Isn't bombing the bejeebers out of somebody a bombing? 
WASHINGTON. Nov. 30— The Senate voted 44 to 31 to day to approve a $2.2‐billion appropriation for economic and military foreign aid in the cur rent fiscal year. 
A former Army intelligence officer says the Army gave him an expense account, provided him with liquor and offered to supply him with marijuana if it were necessary while he was assigned to infiltrate antiwar groups. 
No Solution in Federal Aid
SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 30 (AP)—A letter signed with the name of Bernardine Dohrn, a Weatherman leader on the Fed eral Bureau of Investigation's “most wanted” list, threatened today a wave of attacks on po lice and Federal installations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 30 (Reuters) — The Vietcong said today that they would cease fighting for three days both at Christmas and New Year and for four days at Tet, the lunar new year. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 30— High Administration officials privately acknowledge that the United States is establishing and reinforcing a new rationale for American air strikes against North Vietnam. 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Dec. 1—A United States pro posal aimed at getting protec tion for American war prison. ers in Vietnam was approved today by a committee of the General Assembly. 
PNOMPENH. Cambodia, Dec. 1 (AP)—A military spokesman said Cambodian troops opened a drive today 20 miles north of Pnompenh and pushed enemy forces from positions they seized two days ago. 
VILLANOVA, Pa., Dec. 1 (UPI)—President Nixon extend ed a White House invitation to day to three Villanova Univer sity students who organized a national campus drive that collected more than 200,000 Christmas cards for United States servicemen in Vietnam. The students, who will visit the President at noon tomorrow, are Robert J. Breslin Jr. and Thomas Creagh, both of Men hasset, L. I., and Tom Treacy of Plainview, N. J. 
PARIS, Dec. 1—David K. E. Bruce, the chief of the United States delegation at the Viet nam peace talks, held his first, news conference here today and denounced what he called the Vietnamese Communists’ “shameful attitude” toward American war prisoners and their refusal to negotiate at the peace table. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 1— About a dozen former service men, appearing here at the start of an informal inquiry into United States war policy, said today that they had wit nessed the torture or murder of South Vietnamese civilians.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Dec. 1—Following is the text of the United States‐spon sored resolution on prisoners of war adopted today by the Social Committee of the Gen eral Assembly: 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 1 —A former machine gunner testified today that he had seen his platoon commander, First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., open fire on unarmed Viet namese civilians who had been herded into a ditch in the hamlet of Mylai 4. 
Courage Needed in Facing State Fiscal Problems 
SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 2, (UPI) — While shouting dem onstrators waved Vietcong flags outside his hotel, Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam, appealed to Americans today to continue to support his Government against the Communists. 
NEW ORLEANS, Dec. 1 (UPI)—A Shell Oil Company drilling platform with 22 producing wells burst into flames in the Gulf of Mexico 10 miles off the Louisiana coast today. At least two men were killed. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 1 — United States intelligence ana llysts have reported the estab ishment of a major Chinese supplied guerrilla base this month at Dong Luang, in east ern Thailand. 
The United Nations has spoken up eloquently and decisively in behalf of more humane treatment for prisoners of war and for compliance with the Geneva Convention of 1949. Ambassador Charles W. Yost said that adoption of this resolution by the General Assem bly Social Committee shows that the plight of American prisoners in Vietnam “weighs on the conscience of the world.” 
TRAVIS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Dec. 2 (UPI) — Capt. Richard Hubbard, an Air Force doctor who became a conscien tious objector because of what he called the military's “capac ity for evil,” was ordered to day to be dismissed from •the service. Captain Hubbard, 29 years old, of Galion, Ohio, and Air Force Academy graduate, was found guilty by a one‐man court‐martial of deliberately missing a flight to Vietnam last, July 6. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 2—A long‐haired youth who once told Army investigators that First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. had ordered the slaughter of Vietnamese civil ians at Mylai 4 invoked the Fifth Amendment today at the Calley court‐martial and re fused to answer all questions relating to the alleged mas sacre.W. Kennedy, that most of the questions were not incriminat ing and had to be answered. 
Nixon Correct on Vietnam
LOS ANGELES, Dec. 2 (UPI) —Nguyen Cao Ky, Vice Presi dent of South Vietnam, said today that he was not disturbed by demonstrations against him and indicated he would have liked to have met some of the protesters. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 2—A group of Vietnam war veterans continued their efforts today to document charges of wide spread murder, torture and terrorism by American forces in South Vietnam. 
Disingenuous is a charitable word to describe Defense Secretary Laird's explanation of why he failed to tell the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the Nov. 21 bombing of North Vietnam included air strikes in the Hanoi area. “I only answer the questions that are asked,” he said. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 2—Sir Robert Thompson, the British expert on guerrilla warfare, has told President Nixon that the United States and allied intelli gence and police efforts have failed to destroy the Com munist subversive apparatus in South Vietnam. 
BERLIN, Dec. 2—The Com munist party and government leaders of seven Soviet‐bloc countries declared today after a day's consultations that their attitudes were un animous on the problems of Europe, Vietnam and the Middle East. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 2—An army psychologist told a Senate investigating panel today that more than half the enlisted men in a survey of drug abuse in South Vietnam acknowledged having used marijuana at least once and that one in six was a “habituated user.” 
LONDON—They used to come over the brow of the hill every evening at 6:40 during the Huntley‐Brinkley broadcast in a slow‐moving tapestry: First a doe, sniffing the air for pos sible danger to the two fawns follow ing her, then a half‐grown step‐brother and finally the antlered sire, all nib bling intently as they made their way toward the salt block down the western slope of our farm. Once in a while, when the volume of our TV set crackled with the bark of guns in Vietnam or the snarl of jet, the deer would lift their heads and listen, but most of the time they were too busy feeding to notice. 
VALPARAISO, Fla., Dec. 2 (Reuters)—The North Vietnam ese prison camp at Sontay, site of an unsuccessful United States prisoner‐of‐war rescue raid last month, had been va cant for up to three months, an Air Force brigadier general said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 2 (AP) — Taking advan tage of moonless nights, the North Vietnamese and Vietcong have reportedly stepped up rocket barrages against towns and military bases almost the entire length of South Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec 2 (AP)—Two women inmates of a South Vietnamese prison charged today that riot police had beaten and tear‐gassed more than 100 women prisoners and thrown lye or acid on the group. Both women are in a hospital in Saigon. 
PARIS, Dec. 3—The United States proposed today that all prisoner facilities in North and South Vietnam be opened to inspection and recommenda tions by an impartial interna tional organization such as the Red Cross. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 3—A spokesman for the 40 antiwar veterans who have testified at an unofficial inquiry into Unit ed States war policies said to day that they had tried to show that “war crimes” by American forces in South Vietnam were not “aberrant isolated acts.” 
Because of an editing error, an article in early editions of The New York Times yester day erroneously described Op eration Phoenix in South Viet nam as “a code name for a se cret Central Intelligence Agen cy operation that led to the alleged massacre at Mylai, March 16, 1968.” The dispatch dealt with criticism of Opera tion Phoenix's effectiveness re portedly made by Sir Robert Thompson. The erroneous de scription did not appear in late editions.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 3 — Paul D. Meadlo, who once told a national television au dience that he had shot un armed Vietnamese civilians at Mylai because it “just seemed like it was the natural thing to do at the time,” was temp orarily taken into custody by the military police today after he refused to testify at the court‐martial of First Lieut. William L. CalIev Jr. 
CHICAGO, Dec. 3—Federal Judge Julius J. Hoffman said today that he remembered that the jury in the Chicago con spiracy trial had reported it self deadlocked the day it be gan deliberations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 3 (Reuters) — American battle deaths declined by half last week to 32, the United States command said today. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 3—The White House confirmed to day that Sir Robert Thompson, the British expert on guerrilla warfare, had made a recent trip to South Vietnam for Pres ident Nixon and had submitted his findings to him in a secret report. 
CORAL SPRINGS, Fla.. Dec. 3 (AP)—Brian Allin, a former artillery officer in Vietnam, shot a four‐under‐par 67 today and gained a tie with six others for the lead in the first round of the $125,000 Coral Springs open golf tournament Thursday. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 3—A 19‐year‐old Wisconsin girl seemed to startle President Nixon today when she told him to “get us out of the war” as he was giving her an award for public service. As the President was handing her one of four Young Ameri‐ can Medals distributed at a ceremony in the White House Blue Room this morning, Debra Jean Sweet delivered her plea in a voice barely audible to nearby newsmen. The reporters heard only the phrases “Mr. President, find it very hard to believe” and “until you get us out of the war.” Later, Miss Sweet reported that she had said to the President: “I find it hard to believe in your sincerity in giving the awards until you get us out of Vietnam.” Mr. Nixon, who seemed a bit taken aback, replied in voice that could easily be heard: “We're doing the best we can.”
BERLIN, Dec. 3—The seven leaders of the Soviet bloc indi cated today that East Germany had been forced to give ground on the issue of Western rights in West Berlin. 
Dec. 3. 1970
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 3—Capt. John Lamb, 25‐year‐old Air Force pilot from Ohatchee, Ala., climbed into his small A‐37 attack lighter at the Bienhoa air base, taxied out and then took off toward the Cambodian border. 
To the Editor.
Subjection of Baltic Nations
WASHINGTON. Dec. 4 — By the time a knock on her hotel room door awakened Debra Jean Sweet again early this morning, she had resigned her self to a sleepless night be cause of interruptions. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 4 (UPI)—United States military sources today disclosed that there will be an acceleration in the withdrawal of American troops that will reduce their strength in South Vietnam to 337,000 men by Dec. 31. This is 7,000 fewer than originally had been planned. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 4—The Supreme Court, with which President Nguyen Van Thieu has clashed frequently in the last year, today elected court president more to his liking. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 4 — Before a hushed court, a former soldier described today the alleged massacre of South Vietnamese civilians at Mylai and said that he had seen First Lieutenant William L. Calley Jr. pour automatic rifle fire into a ditch full of people and “blow the head off” a woman who tried to rise from a pile of corpses. 
Dec. 4, 1970 
WASHINGTON Dec. 4 (UPI) —Secretary of the Army Stan ley R. Resor dismissed today a soldier's charges that Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the United States commander in Vietnam, had condoned inhu man treatment of prisoners. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 4 (AP)—South Vietnamese infantrymen pushed deeper in to the U Minh Forest, 140 miles southwest of Saigon, today and reported 59 Vietcong killed in the first three days of the 7,000 man drive into the enemy stronghold. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 5—Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam is relaxing in Hawaii this weekend at the end of a visit to the United States that, contrary to expec tations, proved to be quiet, low‐key and uneventful. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 5—The first “Freedom Bird” flight carrying soldiers home from the war for two weeks left here today with 200 of the happiest men in Indochina. 
COLORADO SPRINGS, Dec. 5 (AP)—Brig. Gen. Robin Olds, commandant of cadets at the Air Force Academy, will be come the Air Force director of aerospace safety Feb. 1, the academy superintendent, Lieut. Gen. A. P. Clark, announced Monday. General Olds, a World War II and Vietnam flying ace, will he succeeded by Brig. Gen. Walter T. Galligan, now di rector of the Tactical Air Control Center in South Viet nam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 5 (AP)—The United States com mand reported today the rescue of two Air Force sergeants, said to be the only survivors among 32 Americans and 12 South Vietnamese aboard a C‐123 transport that crashed last Sun day near Camranh Bay. The two men, reported to have been taken to a military hospital at Carnranh Bay, were identified as Sgt. Gary Lee Ald redge of Navarro, Calif., and Sgt. Vincent Fairbrother of Riverside, R.I. United States officials said that Sergeant Ald redge was in “fair condition” with a broken leg and that Ser geant Fairbrother was “seriously ill” with an infected broken knee.
FORT BENNING, Ga.—Early one afternoon last week, re porters in the press room at the courthouse on the military post noticed a small figure in an officer's uniform striding along the sidewalk outside, all alone. 
Reprisals in Legal Services
WASHINGTON, Dec. 5—Sen ator Edward M. Kennedy charged today that many ref ugees in South Vietnam were returning to areas controlled by the Vietcong because of failures in the Saigon Govern ment's programs of assistance to war victims. 
WASHINGTON — For all prac tical purposes, Senator J. W. Ful bright charged last week, the De fense Department is “taking over the primary role in our foreign policy now,” especially on mat ters dealing with Southeast Asia. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. (Agence France‐Presse)‐‐North Vietnam said today that it was determined to “continue to shoot down American recon naissance planes, set up anti aircraft installations anywhere and mass troops in any sector.” 
U.S. Now Stressing Pessimistic Outlook
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Dec. 6 (AP)—Vietcong terrorists seized and killed two South Vietnamese army officers and three other soldiers late last night, South Vietnamese military headquarters reported today. 
FORT RILEY, Kan., Dec. 5 (UPI) — Jet flights bringing wounded Vietnam servicemen to Irwin Army Hospital will be forced to land nearly an hour's automobile drive away begin ning Jan. 1. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 5 — Vice President Ky's current visit to the United States has received little pub lic attention among the Viet namese, except from his habitual partisans, who are fa vorably disposed toward the visit, and habitual detractors, who are not. 

WASHINGTON, Dec. 6 (AP) —Senator Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, rec ommended today that the United States propose a truce in Vietnam from Christmas through late January to help reach a permanent cease‐fire. The proposal won prompt sup port from the Nixon Admini stration. 
PARIS—The November 21 bomb ings were not a surprise in Hanoi. The commotion aroused in Washington by the downing of an American plane on the 13th had given the impression that something serious was in the offing. 
SOUTH VIETNAM, Dec. 6 (AP)—A United States military spokesman said that the Strate gic Air Command sent B‐52 bombers over Cambodia today to prevent North Vietnamese war supplies from reaching units that are pressing a major offensive on Cambodia's em battled northern front.
Evaluating Use of Airpower in Vietnam
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 7 (AP) — The South Vietnamese Government introduced today a new tax law. A small airplane dropped thousands of leaflets on down town Saigon saying the tax men were beginning house‐to house calls to help taxpayers fill out their forms.
A child‐care center in the Bushwick area of Brooklyn, named for a soldier who was killed in action in 1968 after only two weeks in Vietnam, was dedicated yesterday.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 7—The House adopted a resolution to day praising those who took part in the unsuccessful effort last month to free United States prisoners of war near Hanoi. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 7— The State Department said to day that discussions were under way between the United States and South Vietnam on the possibility of proposing an extended holiday truce in Vietnam. 
Fulbright's Attack Held Misdirected
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 7 (AP)—The Cambodian com mand said today that North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops might have captured district headquarters, 37 miles northeast of Pnompenh, that was being defended by a Cam bodian battalion. 
LISBON, Dec. 7 (Reuters)— The Portuguese Government, which has formally denied in volvement in an invasion of Guinea last month, today re jected the conclusions of a special United Nations investi gating mission. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 7 — A witness at the murder trial of First Lieutenant Wil liam L. Calley Jr. said today that the killing of South Viet namese civilians in a ditch out side Mylai went on for an hour, with group after group of women, children and old men being shoved into a trench by soldiers and then shot by Lieutenant Calley. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 8—Vice Presi dent Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam returned from the United States today to report he had received assurances that American officials would keep hands off the presidential elec tions here next year. 
VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 7 (Reuters)—The Laotian Govern ment reported today the loss of a strategic intelligence out post at Muong Moc, about 20 miles from the border with North Vietnam. 
In the last two weeks the Nixon Administration has not only escalated the war in Vietnam but also the hot rhetoric around the prisoner ‐ of ‐ war issue which it needs to gain support for a win‐the‐war policy. In so doing it has engaged in gross distortions of fact and deliberate distractions. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 7 (AP)—The United States command reported today the finding of the wreckage of C‐123 transport plane that crashed in central South Viet nam more than a week ago. No survivors were reported among the 6 United States servicemen and 73 South Vietnamese aboard. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 7—With the rice paddies drying out along the Mekong north east of here, Communist troops have apparently opened a drive to extend their supply lines south toward Pnompenh. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 8 (UPI) — Two French schoolteachers who raised Vietcong flag atop a South Vietnames statue in July were sentenced to prison today by a miltary court. Andre Marcel Menras, 25 years old, was sen tenced to three years in prison and Jean Pierre Debris, 26, to four years. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 8 (AP)—South Vietnamese infantrymen were reported to day to be continuing a drive into the U Minh Forest seeking about 3,000 Vietcong believed, hiding in the mangrove swamps and bamboo thickets. 
The Ford Foundation has an nounced grants for programs designed to increase the quan tity and quality of food produc tion in Asia, Africa and Latin America. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 8 (AP) —Senator J. W. Fulbright said today there were indications that United States officials knew that no prisoners were in an alleged P.O.W. camp at Son tay, North Vietnam, and that rescue attempt there last month “had other purposes.” 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 8 —The Government rested its case against First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. late today after rigorous cross‐examina tion by defense counsel failed to shake the testimony of two witnesses who said they had seen the lieutenant fire into a ditch filled with South Vietna mese civilians during an alleged massacre at Mylai. 
QUINHON, South Vietnam, Dec. 8 (AP)—Demonstrators chanting “Yankee go home!” hurled rocks at American sol diers and burned a jeep today in protest against the fatal shooting of a Vietnamese high school boy by a United States soldier. 
ALBUQERQUE, N. M., Dec. 8 (UPI) — The Mountain Bell Telephone Company said yes terday that it would urge its 2.1 million telephone users in its eight‐state area to ask Hanoi for humane treatment of Amer ican prisoners of war. A com pany spokesman said it would make the appeal in an insert to be mailed with December tele phone bills. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 9 — With Administration support, the House Appropriations Com mittee set in motion today legislative maneuver around the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to obtain Congres sional approval of a large‐scale military aid program for Cam bodia. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 9—The South, Vietnamese Gov ernment has decided on one day truces for Christmas and New Years despite Washing ton's officially expressed inter est in an extended ‘holiday cease‐fire. 
Special to The New York Times
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Dec. 9—Security officers and secretariat officials were em barrassed this morning when they learned that a speaker addressing the General Assem bly was a casual visitor from South Vietnam and not the delegate of Laos. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 10 (AP)—An enemy force blasted a South Vietnamese command post in the Fishhook area just inside Cambodia, killing or wounding at least half the defenders and destroying several trucks, the military command reported to da?? 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 9 — Lawyers defending First Lieut. William L. Calley, Jr. said today that they would try to prove the killing of unarmed South Vietnamese noncombat ants at Mylai had been a result of “legal and justifiable acts of war.” 

McALESTER, Okla., Dec. (UPI)—Randall Herrod of Cal vin, a former marine who had his Silver Star medal taken away from him when he was originally charged in the slay‐ ings in Mylai 4, will get his medal back tomorrow. A court martial in Vietnam has ac quitted the marine. He will get the medal at the Naval Depot here.
FORT BRAGG, N. C., Dec. 9 (AP) — Secretary of Defense Melvin It,. Laird presented Silver Star medals to Army and Air force commandos today in cere monies that disclosed that the unsuccessful effort to free American prisoners from North Vietnam was greater in size and scope than previously indi cated. Mr. Laird pinned medals on 96 of the raiders. The Army said the 96, plus four others decorated earlier at the White House, made up the party of 100 men that raided an evac uated prison camp at Sontay Nov. 21. 
Proposals for a year‐end cease‐fire in Vietnam, now under “active consideration” by the Nixon Administra tion, could make a major contribution to peace in South east Asia. But the bid for a five‐week halt in hostilities is doomed from the start unless implemented with imagi nation and courage.
SVAYRIENG, Cambodia, Dec. 9—More than 400 South Viet namese peasant families have taken over abandoned Cambo dian farmhouses and ricelands as far as seven miles inside Cambodia near the border with South Vietnam, the area's mili tary governor said today. 
President Nixon, in a nationally televised news conference, declared yesterday that military targets in North Vietnam would be bombed if “the level of fighting in South Vietnam” is increased by the North Viet namese. He added that missile and mili tary complexes in North Vietnam would’ be bombed if American reconnaissance planes were fired upon over that country. [Page 1, Columns 2–3; Text, P. 32.] 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10— The head of the pacification program in South Vietnam has been summoned to confer here next week with Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird amid a controversy in the Adminis tration over the effectiveness of the effort to suppress the Vietcong's underground organi zation. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 10—Allegations that American servicemen here are being denied their right to civilian counsel in court‐mar tial trials were made today by an American lawyer who came to South Vietnam to defend them, 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 10—A South Vietnamese Army doctor, carrying four hand grenades and a copy of the Constitution of South Viet nam, succeeded in reaching President Nguyen Van Thieu today to complain about cor runtion in this country. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10— President Nixon pledged to night to work in harmony with Republicans and Democrats in the new Congress, and said that “under no circumstances” would he support a third‐party candidacy against a regular Re publican. 
Won't you be seated, please. Miss Thomas has the first question tonight. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 10 (AP)—The United States command reported to day that 27 Americans were killed in action in Indochina last week, the second lowest toll this year.PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 10 (AP) — Cambodian troops trying to reopen the vital sup ply route from the sea clashed this morning with enemy troops holding Route 4 between Pnom penh and the port of Kompong Som. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 10—First Lieut. William L. Cal ley Jr. had orders to “kill every living thing” in Mylai, and the alleged “massacre” that fol lowed was observed by super ior officers who did nothing to halt it, the lieutenant's chief defense counsel said today. 
PARIS, Dec. 10—The United States and South Vietnam to day proposed an immediate ex change of war prisoners with North Vietnam and the Viet cong. They countered with an offer of a cease‐fire immedi ately upon agreement by the United States to withdraw its forces from South Vietnam by next June 30.HONG KONG, Dec. 10—The North Vietnamese Government and the Workers (Communist) party issued an extraordinary appeal today to the people andSAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 10 (UPI)—North Vietnam today denounced any proposal of an extended cease‐fire in South Vietnam from Christmas to the Tet lunar new year on Jan. 26 as “a new treacherous trick by the Nixon Administra‐ 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 President Nixon declared to night that if North Vietnamese Forces “increase the level of fighting in South Vietnam,” as American forces are withdrawn, he would retaliate by ordering the bombing of military targets in North Vietnam.ed States and North Vietnam in 1968 during the Administra tion of Lyndon B. Johnson. 
FORT BENNING. Ga., Dec, 11—A former helicopter pilot, testifying for the defense at the murder trial of First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr., said today that a large group of Vietnam. ese strewn along a trail at the southern edge of Mylai had been killed before any Ameri can troops reached the scene. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Dec. 12 (UPI) — The United States command report ed yesterday that there had been no American combat deaths in the 48 hours ended last midnight. This was the sec ond such report in a month. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 11—Behind the Nixon Adminis tration's expanding threats to resume the bombing of North Vietnam lies a growing conviction within the Government that Hanoi got very much the better of the deal it struck with President Lyndon B. Johnson two years ago.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 11 (Reu ters) — Significant new infor mation on more than 200 Americans captured or missing in the Vietnam war has been received here from Hanoi through Sweden; United States officials said today. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 11 — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird suggested today that the absence of progress at the Paris peace talks could provide an other justification for renewed bombing of North Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Saturday, Dec. 12—Curtis W. Tarr, director of the Selective Service System, said today that five days of talking with American soldiers in the field has convinced him “more than ever” that educational defer ments from the draft should be abolished. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 11 (Reuters) — South Vietnam confiscated today's issues of 11 Saigon daily newspapers be cause of false reports quoting President Nguyen Van, Thieu as having said that the United States and South Vietnam were considering a month‐long cease fire during the Christmas, New Year and Tet holiday periods, a Government spokesman said. 
QHINHON, South Vietnam, Dec. 11 (AP) — The United States Army charged an en listed man with negligent homicide today in the killing of a Vietnamese boy that set off two days of anti‐American rioting here earlier this week. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 12— Following are excerpts from a letter from President Nixon to William W. Scranton, chairman of the President's Commission on Campus Un rest: 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 12 (UPI)—The Americal Division has announced that it plans to set up a “hot line” for rapid communication between lower ranking blacks and high command authorities on racial issues and differences. 
The most critical question raised by President Nixon's threat to resume the bombing of North Vietnam if Hanoi's forces “increase the level of fighting” in the South whether a decision already has been made to reverse policy and re‐escalate the war. 
NINHOKAI RIDGE, South Vietnam, Dec. 4—In the last month of the fifth year of full‐scale American action in Vietnam, a newly arrived 19‐year‐old private named Thomas Hobbs has begun to feel afraid. He thinks that his armored personnel carrier— known as a gun track be cause it is equipped with an 81‐mm. mortar—will hit an other mine. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 12— Senator J. W. Fulbright has been raising obections in the Senate and the Foreign Rela tions Committee to a seeming.; ly noncontroversial resolution praising the men who raided the Sontay prison camp in North Vietnam last month. 
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 12 (Agence France‐Presse)—The press organs of the North Viet namese Communist party and army reacted sharply today to President Nixon's warning of retaliatory bombing attacks, presenting it as a preparation of American opinion for a stepping up of the war in Indochina. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 12 (AP) —United States Investigators reported today that they had found shortages of skilled med ical help, deficient facilities and even a lack of reliable statistics in their review of South Viet namese civilian health and war linked casualty programs. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 12 (AP)—A Cambodian spokes man said today that Government forces had fought off heavy enemy assaults in hand‐to‐hand combat 38 miles northeast of Pnompenh. But field reports said that a large number of North Vietnamese and Viet cong troops remained in the area. 
Cardinal Cooke, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, left by plane last night to visit American servicemen and their families in the Pacific area during the Christmas season.
PARIS, Dec. 13 (Reuters)— Hanoi's chief negotiator at the peace talks here said tonight his country was prepared for a pos'sible resumption of the bombing, of North Vietnam. 
HONG KONG, Dec. 13 (Reu ters) — North Vietnam said to day that chemical warfare by the United States in South Vietnam had killed hundreds of people and threatened to turn vast areas into wasteland. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 14 (Reuters)—Vi etcong gunners shot down two United. States‐Army helicopters the United States mili‐ 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 13 — The United States command reported today that an American bomber with top secret intelligence equipment had been shot down in Laos. 
QUINHQN, South Vietnam, Dec. 13—To most Vietnamese in this crowded, ugly prov ince capital on the South China Sea, the American soldier is a big foreigner who drives recklessly through town; yanks the, hair of their daughters, knoCks .hats old men, smokes ,marijuana constantly, calls them “Dinks” and sometimes killS innocent people: 
HONG KONG, Monday, Dec. ‘14—The Chinese Communist leaders called on the people of China yesterday to “render all out support” to the peoples of Indochina in their war against what was termed American ag gression. 
WASHINGTON, Dec.13. hi the status‐conscious White House office spade is often the best index of. prestige 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 14 (Reu ters)—The Defense Department today left open the door for slowdown—or even a complete stop—in troop withdrawals from South Vietnam in the next two months in face of an enemy build‐up of men and supplies before Tet, the Lunar New Year.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 14 — The United States has told the International Committee of the Red Cross that the American Government has a “residual” responsibility for South Viet namese civilian detainees whom it turns over to the Government of South Vietnam.
SAIGON, Tuesday, Dec. 15 (AP)—A United States infan try patrol was virtually wiped out when it inadvertently en tered an old American mine field last Saturday night a mile south of the demilitarized zone, the United States com mand said today.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 14 —Five defense witnesses at the murder trial of First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. said today that when they stormed the South Vietnamese hamlet of Mylai they were under the clear impression that their company commander, Capt. Ernest L. Me dina, wanted everyone killed, including women and babies.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 14 (AP) — Highly placed sources here reported today that the United States had formed a provisional air caval ry brigade with more than 200 helicopters to patrol 10,000 square miles around Saigon.
LONDON, Dec. 14 (AP)—Sir Robert Thompson, an adviser to President Nixon on the war in Vietnam, said today that the United States Vietnamization and pacification policies were “unassailable by the enemy.”
PARIS, Dec. 14—A group of 60 scientists hostile to the war in Vietnam have concluded that the United States armed forces are using that country as a laboratory for chemical war fare. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 15 —The shooting at Mylai of wounded Vietnamese children was described today at the murder trial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. by a for mer squad leader who acknowl edged that he had helped “put ‘em out of their misery.” 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 15—A House‐Senate conference com mittee introduced a possible loophole today in the proposed legislative restraints on Presi dent Nixon's power to send ground troops to Cambodia. 
Senator‐elect James. L Buck ley, who proclaimed himself member of the “Nixon team” the day after his election, in dicated yesterday that he was ready to oppose the President on two controversial programs —welfare reforms and the fi nancing of a supersonic jet transport. 
Vietnam ‘Understanding’ To the Editor: In his press conference on Dec. 10 the President gave a curious interpie teflon of his “understanding” with respect to reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam. He stated that, under the “understanding,” not only may we bomb missile sites if our planes are fired upon, but we may also bomb military sites, supply lines and mili tary “complexes” (whatever this may include) if we see signs of an enemy build‐up. This is not an “understand ing”; this is an ultimatum. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 15 (Reuters) — South Viet nam was reported to have sent a 3,000‐man force deep into Cambodia today in response to an appeal for help from Premier Lon Nol. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 15— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced today that he would visit South Vietnam early next month to confer with Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the American field commander, on the prospect fat troop reductions. 
CHICAGO, Dec. 15 (UP1)— Vice President Agnew said to day that time had proved Presi dent Nixon right in Ordering American troops into Cambodia last spring. 
PITTSBURGH, Dec. 15 (AP) —The sentence of Marine Pvt. Michael’ Schwarz, convicted of premeditated murder in the death of 12 Vietnamese civil ians, has been commuted from life to a dishonorable discharge and a year at hard labor, his attorney, James E. McLaughlin, announced today. Mr. McLaugh lin said he had been informed of the commutation in an order from the military convening authority, Maj. Gen. C. F. Wid decke, commander of the First Marine Division at Danang, South Vietnam. 
MOSCOW, Dec. 16 (AP)— The Soviet Government de nounced President Nixon today for his warning last week that the bombing of North Vietnam might be .resumed it United States appeared to be threat ened by a build‐up of enemy forces along the South Vietna mese border.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 16—Whatever else it may be doing with its recent flurry of statements designed to jus tify a substantial resumption of the bombing of North Vietnam, the Ad ministration is flirting with the same tactics that opened President John‐. son's fatal credibility gap—the half truth, the untruth and anything but the truth.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 16—A report by Senate investigators said today that the United States was providing “close air support” for Cambodian armed forces and carrying out a wide variety of other combat mis sions under the “camouflage” of acting to prevent move ments by Communist troops in to South Vietnam.
SAIGON, Thursday, Dec. 17— High‐ranking American officials here reportedly have recom mended a complete halt in the program of crop‐destroying herbicides long used to deny food to the enemy.
To the Editor:
FORT BENNING, Ga, Dec. 16 — A defense witness testified today at the trial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. that after the four‐hour assault on Mylai 4, Capt. Ernest L. Medina re ceived a radio query, apparently from his superiors in Task Force Barker. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 16 (AP)—One of the main United States military housing sections here came under a grenade attack and a bombing tonight, and bomb squads and military policemen responded to what turned out to be four false alarms from other Ameri can installations. 
To the Editor:
PARIS, Dec. 17—North Viet nam invited the United States today to suggest a “reasonable deadline” for the withdrawal of its forces from South Vietnam since it had rejected the dead line of next June 30 that the Communist side had proposed. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 17—The United States today rebuffed a stern Soviet denunciation of Anwtican bombing policy on North Vietnam and urged Mos cow to persuade Hanoi to stop shooting at American recon naissance planes. 
FORT MCPHERSON, Ga. Dec. 17 (UPI)—An attorney for Cap tain Medina indicated today that the captain would not deny that lie :►au ordered the leveling of My I,ai and the slaughter of the Vietnamese village's inhabi tants. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 17 (Al) — With battle field action continuing, at a rel atively low level, the United States command reported to day that 29 Americans were killed in fighting in Indochina last week. 
WASHINGTON, Dec, 17(AP) — —A chaotic rump session of the White House Conference on Children adopted resolu tions tonight against the Viet nam war and the supersonic transport. The delegates also demanded Programs “to feed all the hungry people in America.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 15—It took the 115 men in a North Vietnamese infantry company almost 90 days to come down the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and no man reached South Vietnam without know ing the fevers of malaria and an exhaustion that sleep did not quickly cure. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Dec. 17 —The court‐martial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. ad journed until Jan. 11 today with the defense still seeking to prove that any slaughter of South Vietnamese civilians at Mylai was done on orders from the company commander, Capt. Ernest L. Medina. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sat urday, Dec. 19 (AP)—Two en emy rockets crashed into Saigon early today, reportedly killing six South Vietnamese and wounding eight. 

ISTARTED teaching poetry writing at P.S. 61, which is in Manhattan on East 12th Street between Ave nues B and C, in 1968. I hoped to find a way of teaching the subject that would make children as happy to write poems as they are to draw and paint, and after a few months it seemed to me that I had found it. 
After two months of negativism, the Vietnamese Communists now have made a first cautious response President Nixon's imaginative October offer to negotiate a standstill ceasefire, a political settlement and a time table for American withdrawal. Their response, outlined at the last two sessions of the Paris peace talks, indicates several significant advances from previous positions. It warrants far more vigorous American probing than it ap pears to be receiving. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 19—The State Department announced to day that Leonid Rigerman and his mother, Mrs. Esther Michael Rigerman, were both legally “native born” United States citizens. 
CLEVELAND, Dec. 19 (UPI) —The American Civil Liberties Union has asked the Supreme Court to declare unconstitu tional a high school regulation forbidding students to wear political buttons. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 19 (AP) — Twenty‐five of the first 198 United States serv icemen to enjoy a new 14‐day leave in the United States failed to return to Vietnam yesterday as scheduled, the Pentagon said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Dec. 20 (AP) — The United States command an nounced today the loss of four aircraft, including an Air Force F‐4 Phantom fighter‐bomber shot down over the Plaine des Jarres in Laos. Four Americans were reported killed and 19 wounded. 
SAIGON—The rules set by Washington for the conduct of the air war in Indochina have long had a way of shifting be hind a screen of verbal ambi guity, and they seem to have shifted once again. 
COLUMBIA, S. C., Dec. 19— The South Carolina Supreme Court has reversed the convic tions of two University of South Carolina students for trespassing and disorderly con duct during an antiwar demon stration on a visit to Columbia last year by President Nixon. 
FORT BENNING, Ga. — First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. was wearing a broad smile at the end of last week, and well he might. For as his court‐martial, in which he has been charged with the premeditated murder of not less than 102 Vietnamese civilians, went into a Christmas recess last Thursday, it began to appear that it was not Rusty Calley who was on trial but his company commander, Capt. Er nest L. Medina. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Dec. 21 (AP)—The United States Air Force sent four military transports to Viet nam today to take 350 Ameri can soldiers home for Christmas after the South Vietnamese Government rerused to clear a commercial Boeing 747 jet for landing at Tonsonnhut Air Base. The 350 G.I.'s were delayed 12 hours after the 747—the first jumbo jet scheduled to land in Vietnam—was denied clearance to pick them up.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 20 — Frank Shakespeare, the direc tor of the United States In formation Agency, said today that American prestige abroad had suffered as a result of the “traumatic” impact of the United States military incur sion into Cambodia last May and June.
HONG KONG, Dec. 20 (Reu ters) — Communist China and the Soviet Union expressed their support today for the Na tional Liberation Front of South Vietnam on the 10th anniver sary of its founding. The Peking radio broadcast a Peking rally supporting the Vietcong and Kremlin leaders in Moscow pledged continued support for the front.
SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 20 (AP) — A Federal judge has ruled that a soldier killed in Vietnam will be buried in Ar lington National Cemetery after memorial services in Ontario.
To the Editor:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 20 (AP)—Allied commands reported today that South Viet namese forces and United States planes killed 99 North Vietnamese and Vietcong in weekend actions in South Viet nam.
Along with the Vice President, tra ditional military men lament the grow ing “permissiveness” of American society and the deterioration, of disci pline in today's army. They believe that since armies exist to win wars, the means to win them must be made available, and the most important of these means is discipline. Unfortunate ly, we have discovered of late that too much discipline is not only bad for the Army, but also disastrous for the na tion. If this, on its face, seems outra geous to say, let us turn for our proof to an outrageous event—the My Lai massacre.
SAIGON, Dec. 20 — The South Vietnamese Government offered its continental shelf to the world petroleum market last week when President Nguyen Van Thieu approved a law giving off‐shore oil ex ploration rights to foreign pe troleum com??anies.

WASHINGTON, Dec. 21 (UPI) — President Nixon has under consideration several rec ommendations for attempting to obtain the release of Amer ican war prisoners in North Vietnam, the White House said today. 
UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 21 (Reuters)—The United States circulated to all United Nations members today a detailed de nial of North Vietnamese charges that the United States was following a general policy of massacring civilians in In dochina. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22 — Senator Charles E. Goodell, in his farewell speech to the Sen ate on Vietnam, warned today that the resumption of the bombing of North Vietnam could bring a direct military confrontation with the Soviet Union or Communist China.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 22 (AP) — The United States Command said today two Navy commandos were killed and one was wounded in a skirmish in the Mekong Delta. A farmer enemy soldier serv ing as a scout for the Ameri cans also was wounded. There were no known enemy losses.
DANANG, South Vietnam Dec. 22 (UPI)—Cardinal Cooke of New York, dressed in a United States Army fatigue shirt, khaki trousers and a camouflage steel helmet, flew to the northernmost reaches of South Vietnam today to visit American servicemen near the demilitarized zone.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 22 (UPI)—The United States Embassy expressed re gret today over the accidental shooting on Dec. 7 of a Viet namese student by an American soldier at Quinhon, 250 miles northeast of Saigon.
PARIS, Dec. 22—A delega tion of the National Students Association returning to the United States from Hanoi re ported today that it had nego tiated “declarations of peace” with student organizations in North and South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22— North Vietnam released today what it described as a final and definitive list of all the American prisoners of war it is holding.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 22—The Government of South Vietnam announced that it had decided to release at least 30 disabled or incurably ill North Vietnamese prisoners of war next month to mark the T??t, lunar new year.
CAMP EAGLE, South Viet nam, Dec. 22—Bob Hope in troduced some marijuana jokes info his Vietnam rou tine for the first time today and immediately won the hearts and minds of 15,000 applauding troops. They also liked the girls.
QUANG TRI, South Viet nam — “Yeah, they ask for bacon at breakfast, but we've been out of it for so long they've almost forgot ten what it is,” Specialist 4 Louis. McCullough said. He is one of the four cooks who work two shifts in the offi cers’ mess here, at head quarters for the First Bri gade of the Fifth Infantry Di vision (mechanized).
THE PEOPLE VS. PRESIDENTIAL WAR. Com piled and Edited by John M. Wells with Maria Wilhelm. Foreword by J. William Fulbright. 199 pages. Dunellen Company. $5.95.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 22— Congress completed action to day on legislation authorizing the Administration's proposed $255‐million military aid pro gram for Cambodia but re stricting the President from sending ground combat troops or military advisers into Cam bodia.
SAIGON, Dec. 22 (UPI) — North Vietnam's Defense Min ister, Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, warned in a speech broadcast tonight that unarmed recon naissance planes flying over North Vietnamese territory would be shot down. He said the United States had no right to make such flights.
BIENHOA, South Vietnam, Dec. 22—A colored photograph of Pope Paul VI was among the Christmas presents given today in an elaborate ceremony to several hundred Vietnamese Communist prisoners of war, including small boys who did not look as if they were 13 years old.
ROME, Dec. 22—Pope Paul VI today deplored “corrosive crit icism” of Roman Catholic tra ditions and institutions by American and other Western intellectuals in the church.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 23—Sec retary of State William P. Rogers acknowledged today that President Nixon had gone beyond the terms of the 1968 understanding ending American bombing of North Vietnam when he threatened recently to resume bombing if the enemy stepped up the level of fighting in South Vietnam.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 23 — Secretary of State William P. Rogers today angrily denounced the release by the North Viet namese of a list of previously known prisoners of war as “contemptible maneuver” de signed to divert attention from what he said was their failure to comply with international law.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 24 (AP)—South Vietnamese headquarters re ported today that Communist forces launched two attacks in the first hours of the cease fire they had proclaimed for Christmas.
Population Growth and Food 
In a recent article by Barbara Ondrasik on P.O.W.'s, some words were inadvertently dropped from the text. It should have read: “. . . There have been 790 fliters downed over the North. What, happened to the other 461? Information released recently by Mrs. Cora Weise of the Liaison Com mittee lists names of many men who it is said, ‘have never been detained in North Vietnam.’ Some of these men were, known prisonera; have; been identified from pictures or other sources. . . . ”
HONG KONG, Dec. 23—North Vietnam today defended its treatment of American war prisoners, which it called humane, and said their plight was a result of atrocities com mitted in Vietnam by United States military men and the failure of the United States to withdraw from Vietnam.
BOSTON, Dec. 23 (AP)—A motion asking the Supreme Court to reconsider Massachu setts's test of the constitution ality of the Vietnam war was filed today by State Senator elect Jack H. Backman, Brook line Democrat. Mr. Backman said the motion was filed on behalf of 20,000 petitioners from throughout the country.
PARIS, Dec. 23—The North Vietnamese called on the Nixon Administration today to agree to withdraw American forces from Vietnam by next June 30 or to suggest another date. They offered to help the United States meet the deadline if need be.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 23 Following are excerpts from a news conference held today by Secretary of State William P. Rogers:
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 23 (UPI)—The South Viet namese National Assembly voted today to hold the 1971 presidential election on Oct. 3. The measure, part of an over‐ all election procedures pack age, now goes to the Senate.
A number of wives of American prisoners of War in North Vietnam have se lected their Christmas cards to honor their husbands this year.
DALLAS—In October, 1969, I first became involved in efforts to secure the release of American prisoners being held by the North Vietnamese, Viet cong, Pathet Lao and Chinese. Our strategy was developed from numer ous meetings with them, and with countries friendly to them.
A special three‐judge Fed eral court here ruled yesterday that a New York State law prohibiting the display of words or symbols on the American flag was unconstitutional.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 24—In ??ate September, when heavy ??ighting between Jordanian Army troops and Syrian‐backed Palestinian guerrillas threatened the safety of hundreds of Amer icans in Jordan, the Pentagon alerted the 82d Airborne Divi sion to prepare for a sudden rescue effort in Amman.
PARIS, Dec. 24 (AP)—North Vietnam said tonight that it was willing to hold private talks with the United States to break the deadlock in the peace conference.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 24 (AP) —The Supreme Court was asked today to review a lower court decision that the Securities and Exchange Commission said; “in effect overturns more than 30 years of settled administrative practice” in handling business proxy case disputes.
Tragedy and Guilt at Mylai
WASHINGTON, Dec. 24— Members of the American Friends Service Committee at tempted to deliver to the Presi dent today a report condemn ing Vietnamization and United States policies on the war in Vietnam.

MANILA — A major study commissioned by the Asian De velopment Bank of the South east Asian economy in the sev enties says a rising demand for the natural resources of the region can spur a rapid rate of economic development here in the coming decade. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 25 (AP) — More than 2,000 servicemen turned out for rites held at midnight Christmas Eve by Cardinal Cooke of New York, and Dr. Oswald C. J. Hoffmann of “The Lutheran Hour,” a radio program, at Longbinh, headquarters of the United States Army in Vietnam. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 25—Allied forces resumed the routine of war today after end ing one of the quietest 24‐hour Christmas truces in Vietnam. 
TOKYO, Dec. 25 (UPI)—The Hanoi radio said today that an American delegation had been given 319 letters and 330 Christmas cards for the fam ilies of United States prisoners of war in North Viet??am. 
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, Dec. 25 (AP)—Bob Hope wound up his seventh annual tour of American bases in Vietnam to day and suggested that “poli ticians keep their mouths shut.” 
FORT DIX, N. J.—Special ist 5 Richard W. Weidman, a conscientious objector to the war in Vietnam who once submitted to arrest rather than accept induction into the Army, was honored as Soldier of the Month here in August. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 24—'It seems every year in Vietnam is crucial,” an Amer ican official said this week. “But next year does seem more crucial than this. The military picture has greatly improved. But more of our troops will be leaving. And I'm worried about the political and economic fab ric. Disaster in either could un dermine everything we've done here.” 
CORTLAND, N.Y., Dec. 26 —“Must be an antiwar rally. They can't be waiting for us.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sun day, Dec. 27 (AP)—The Vietcong ended their 72‐hour Christmas cease‐fire with a mortar attack on an allied naval base early today. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26 (UPI) —A House Armed Services sub committee has charged that $10.8‐million worth of goods destined for United States mili tary exchanges in South Viet nam were lost in transit from ports to depots between Dec. 26, 1965, and Jan. 1, 1967. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird's move this week toward curbing military intel ligence activities has under lined the gravity with which political leaders in the capital are coming to view the spread of covert intelligence gather ing and the permanent stor age of such data. 
WASHINGTON—Invariably, the Christmas season brings diplo matic maneuvers on Vietnam— temporary cease‐fires, negotiat ing ploys, publicity on prisoners of war, moves that play upon the emotions of the season. Mostly they are ephemeral, but sometimes they are deeply re vealing. 
Few things better illustrate the importance of the free market in ideas than the drastic change that has re cently occurred in the field of economics. Doctrines that were regarded as heretical and perhaps dangerous only five years ago are now es poused by high officials in Washington and hard‐headed bankers on Wall Street. 
WASHINGTON — In July of 1969, at an airport stop in Guam at the start of a five‐nation tour of the Far East, President Nix on told newsmen of his hope that in the future America's Asian allies could play a much greater role in their own de fense. Mr. Nixon said that while the United States would con tinue to meet its commitmentsin Asia, the time was past when it could or should permit its friends there to become so de pendent that America could be dragged into future Vietnams. The United States will assist its friends, but neither dictate to them nor assume the principal burden of providing troops for their defense. 
NOW that military medals have lost some of their sheen in light of recent reports that the Army has been “handing them out like salted peanuts” in Vietnam, the Government might consider unload ing some of its surplus supplies by pinning them on deserving tourists. 

WASHINGTON, Dec. 26 White House officials say that the success of the talks on the limitation of strategic arms de pends largely on a political de cision by Soviet leaders to pro ceed toward a settlement 
MOSCOW, Dec. 26—The So viet Union and the United Arab Republic, in a communiqué is sued tonight, said they con tinued to support all efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Middle East crisis. 
This book is so irresponsible that it may help to provoke a responsible inquiry into the question of war crimes and atrocities in Vietnam. “Conversations with Americans” is a lesson in what happens when a society shuns the examination of a pressing, emotional issue and leaves the answers to a Mark Lane. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26 (AP) —The so‐called peace dividend, the billions of dollars the Nixon Administration had hoped could be channeled back into health and education programs when the Vietnam war wound down, has proved to be a myth in a wave of inflation. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26 — The White House announced today a program for “an order ly, yet rapid phase‐out of the herbicide operations” in Viet nam. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26—The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has declared that if North Vietnam attempts a large‐scale offensive this spring in Cambodia or in the southern region of South Vietnam, one “possible course of action” for the South Vietnamese would be to stage a ground thrust across the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos to cut the enemy's supply lines. 
SAIGON, Dec. 26—Christmas Day for American troops here was militarily not much differ ent from the preceding weeks of relative quiet on the battle field. 
For a long time Americans refused even to consider the mounting evi dence of war crimes in Vietnam. When Bertrand Russell organized an International War Crimes Tribunal in 1967, the energies of liberals and conservatives alike were devoted to discrediting its evidence, although the Russell proceedings provide a generally reliable account of the criminal side of the American war effort in Vietnam. Similarly, when adistinguished group of religious lea ders, including John Bennett, Abra ham Heschel, William Sloan Coffin Jr., sponsored and endorsed a com pilation of news accounts of war crimes in Vietnam, they could not find a recognized publisher to put out the book. It was finally published in 1968 by the obscure Turnpike Press under the title of “In the Name of America,” but the book, despite its explosive contents and careful ex position, went unnoticed and un reviewed. 
KOMPONG CHAM, Cambodia, Dec. 26 (AP)—Cambodian and North Vietnamese forces were reported to have clashed across the Mekong River from this pro vincial capital today. Field offi cers said the fighting began with an exchange of fire be tween rival patrols picking up their dead. It was the sixth consecutive day of fighting on the river, 50 miles northeast of Phnompenh. Casualties were said to be heavy on both sides. 
WASHINGTON, Dec. 26 (AP) —Two World War II tankers, now at Campanh Bay, Vietnam, are being offered for sale by the Maritime Administration for scrapping in the United States or friendly foreign coun tries. They are now used as floating power plants. 
Secretary of State Rogers spoke to the point describing as a “contemptible maneuver” Hanoi's action in summoning representatives of Senators Kennedy and Fulbright to Paris and handing them a previously known list of American war prisoners. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 26 (AP) — A United States Congressman said to day that North Vietnamese officials had told him Ameri can prisoners of war were allowed to participate in sports and had been given special privileges this Christ mas season. 
CAMBRIDGE, Mass??—My first en counter with Vietnamese scientists oc curred within a few hours after ar riving in Hanoi. As we were crossing the Long Bridge, perhaps the most heavily bombed target around Hanoi, I strained to catch better sight of people moving through the hot dark ness on bicycle and foot. Sitting next to me was Mrs. Tran Thi An, a pro fessor of biochemistry. She began a conversation in French:
WASHINGTON, Dec. 27 (AP) —Senator Eugene J. McCarthy, Democrat of Minnesota, said today that he planned to re main in Washington after his Senate term expired and con tinue to work for political re forms.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 25—Premier Pham Van Dong said today that the recently re leased list of names of 339 American servicemen repre sented a “full and complete” account of all those now held captive in North Vietnam.
TOKYO, Dec. 27 (AP)—The Communist party of North Vietnam said today that unless President Nixon learned from Lyndon B. Johnson's “failure in Vietnam, he will invite upon himself heavier setbacks.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 27 (Reuters) — Two American soldiers were killed and four wounded yesterday when their armored personnel carrier hit a mine near the demilitarized zone, a United States spokes man said yesterday.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 27 (AP) — The Cambodian command said today that North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops had attacked two towns close to their main supply cor ridor in southern Cambodia.
CORTLAND, N.Y., Dec. 27— This was a day for special prayers and parties in this city that raised $10,000 to fly back 16 of its servicemen from Viet nam for a two‐week Christmas leave.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 25—Seven American prisoners of war were seen and two were interviewed by this reporter to day in a small prison camp on the outskirts of Hanoi.
Hanoi's list of prisoners was turned over last Tuesday in Paris to representatives of Sen ator J. W. Fulbright, Democrat of Arkansas, and Senator Ed ward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts. The move was denounced the next day by Sec retary of State William P. Rog ers, who termed it a “contempt ible maneuver” to divert atten tion from what he said was North Vietnam's failure to com ply with international law in its treatment of the men.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 27—A United States Government offi cial said tonight that the North Vietnamese camp where Michael Maclear had inter viewed American prisoners of war was the “Hanoi Hilton.” the showplace camp where numer ous other journalists have been permitted controlled visits with selected individuals.
PHNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 15 — The current North Vietnamese offensive against the roads leading to Phnom penh has caused severe short ages of gas, sugar and beer in the capital.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Dec. 28 (AP)—A. 400‐map force of North Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers has pulled back after seven hours of close fighting for a key river village on Pnom penh's ouster defense ring, the Government reported.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 28— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird today called the inter view of two American prisoners of war by a correspondent of the Canadian Broadcasting Cor poration a carefully “staged and edited” and “censored pro duction” that left many ques tions unanswered.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 28 — A group of American civilian volunteers in Vietnam charged today, in letters to President Nixon and Secretary General Thant, that United States actions in Indochina vio lated the Geneva Convention and other international treaties on the conduct of the war and the treatment of prisoners.
A Westchester group filed suit in Federal Court yesterday seeking to prohibit the police from maintaining surveillance and gathering information about residents engaged in peaceful political protest.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Dec. 28 (Agence France‐Presse)—The Vietcong press agency said to day that more than a million Saigon troops had deserted over the last 10 years. The agency, which gave the figure of 1,027,650 deserters, said that between 1968 and 1970, more than 20,000 men had deserted from the South Vietnamese Seventh Infantry Division alone, a figure that was three times higher than the normal strength of the division.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 28—De fense Secretary Melvin R. Laird forecast today lower draft calls next year, the extent of the drop to depend largely on whether Congress is willing to vote costly increases in military pay and benefits.
ATLANTA, Dec. 29—A feud between a motorcycle gang and hippies erupted in gunfire here today, leaving one man dead and 17 persons charged with murder.
TOKYO, Dec: 29 (AP)— North Vietnam said today that defoliants dumped by United States aircraft in South Viet nam had caused millions of people to suffer the same fate as victims of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic blasts in World War II.
CHICAGO, Dec. 29—A study of defoliation in Vietnam, un dertaken for the American As sociation for the Advancement of Science, has shown a cata strophic effect on some parts of the country.
CHICAGO, Dec. 29 (AP) — The United States has engaged in activities in Vietnam for which Germany and Japan were prosecuted after World War II a legal authority said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 29 — A new strain has been added to the already un easy alliance between Cam bodia and South Vietnam over Pnompenh's need to relieve its critical fuel shortage by importing gas and oil through South Vietnam by way of the Mekong River.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 29 (AP)—Spokesmen said here that South Vietnamese troops had beaten back an enemy ground attack just inside Cam bodia today, killing 74 of the attackers while losing 10 dead. But other enemy forces were reported to have staged co ordinated attacks on points along three of the five main highways leading to Cambodian capital of Pnompenh.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Dec. 31 (Reuters)— A South Vietnamese military spokesman reported today that Vietcong guerrillas killed 19 members of a hamlet defense force in an attack about 90 minutes after the beginning of their New Year's cease‐fire.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 30— Representative Lester L. Wolff of Nassau County charged to day that the South Vietnamese Government was jeopardizing the Operation Reunion program, under which American soldiers in Vietnam are permitted two week leaves in the United States, by threatening to can cel the landing rights of the charter aircraft companies that have been flying the men home.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Dec. 30 — The United States Navy ended its four‐year role in inland waterway combat today.
PARIS, Dec. 30—The Paris peace talks on Vietnam ended their second full year today with both sides agreed that no progress had been made. Each side blamed the intransigence of the other.
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, Sept. 30 — President Nixon came to Yugoslavia today and heard President Tito warn that “universal peace and stability cannot be achieved by the big powers alone.” 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 30 (AP) —Senator Hugh Scott, Senate Republican leader, said today that the last United States com bat troops “will be coming out of Vietnam” by next summer. 
VUNGTAU, South Vietnam, Sept. 30 (Reuters) — Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, com mander of United States forces in Vietnam, was rushed to a hospital today after he collapsed during a ceremony honoring Australian troops fighting in Vietnam. 
There is little hope for a return to an atmosphere of reason in the relationship between the students and the American people if Vice President Agnew's distortions of the President's Commission on Campus Unrest are a preview of the Nixon Administration's response. 

SALT LAKE CITY, Sept. 30 —Vice President Agnew came here today to deliver a political lecture on decency and wound up telling antiwar demonstra tors they should make their points “with your minds, not with your butts.” 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sept. 30 (Reuters)—An Air Viet nam airliner carrying 26 pas sengers and a crew of three crashed today in mountains about 10 miles north of Da nang. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 1 (Reuters)— Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, commander of Ameri can forces in South Vietnam, is recovering satisfactorily after collapsing yesterday, a military spokesman said today. He re ported that the general was resting comfortably in an army hospital. 
LONDON, Oct. 1 (Reuters)— Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam will visit Brit ain for five days, starting Mon day, an embassy spokesman said today. Informed sources said there were no arrange ments for Mr. Ky to see offi cials of the Foreign Office during his private visit.
PARIS, Oct. 1—South Viet nam today denounced as “ab surd, arrogant and simply unac ceptable” the Vietcong peace plan, but an American spokes man refused to say that the initiative had been rejected. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 1—The Nixon Administration is draft ing a new set of proposals, pos sibly including a cease‐fire, for submission to the North Viet namese and the Vietcong at the peace talks in Paris, reliable sources said here today. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Oct. 1 (AP) —A pretrial hearing for First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., charged with murdering 102 Vietnamese civilians in a raid on the hamlet of Mylai at Song my in 1968, will be resumed here on Oct. 13, the Army an nounced today.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 1 (AP)—North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces have cut or attacked Cambodia's three post important highways lead ing from Pnompenh to major centers to the southeast, south west and northwest. 
were killed and 344 were wounded last week, an in crease of 11 in each category over the previous week. The toll raised to 43,737 the num ber of Americans killed in the war since Jan. 1, 1961.

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 1 (Reuters)—President Nguyen van Thieu submitted to the lower house of the legislature a proposed national budget for 1971 of $16.9‐billion, it was disclosed today. 
President Nixon's European journey, capping the series of September crises, must have confused foreign analysts as much as it befuddled American experts. Both, for their own reasons, had thought increasingly that the United States was withdrawing from extensive world commitments into neo isolationism. 
As a result of examining the ac cumulation of powers by the President some years ago, in a book called The Enlargement of the Presidency, I came to the conclusion that the situation was becoming potentially more dan gerous as time passed, and had be come critically dangerous when geno cidal weapons were perfected. That was some years ago, and experience since, especially Vietnam, has con firmed the conclusion. 
For 35 years, the Rev. Carl McIntire, a deposed Presby terian minister who is a right ‐ wing Fundamentalist radio preacher, has tirelessly accused the World Council of Churches, the National Council of Churches and most of the major Protestant denominations of “leftish” tendencies and softness toward Communism. His latest move was an invitation to Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky. of South Vietnam to speak at a “March for Victory” rally in Washington today. Protes tantism in general favors a dovish stance and supports withdrawal of United States forces from Southeast Asia. 
MOSCOW, Oct. 2—Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Communist party leader, stressed again today the need for a political solution of the Middle East crisis, but ac cused Israel and the United States of blocking efforts to reach a negotiated settlement. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 2 — It was an on‐again, off‐again kind of day for the March for Vic tory Committee. The big ques tion was whether Mrs. Nguyen Cao Ky, wife of the Vice Presi dent of Vietnam, would be here tomorrow afternoon to address a rally. 
LONDON, Oct. 2 — Mrs. Audrey Craner looks a little like the early Julie Andrews. Her soft, cultivated English voice and her understated words seemed almost incongruous as she talked the other day about the emotional subject that dominates her life: 
The Vietnamese village that was the scene of the slaying of civilians in MS derives its name from its lo cation near two hills—Ele phant Hill and Horse Moun tain. “Son” means “hill” and “my” means “pleasant.” 
DUBLIN, Oct. 2—Anti‐Nixon slogans were painted on walls in the County Kildare village of Timahoe today, a day be fore President Nixon was due to arrive in Ireland, and pic tures of him, with offensive slogans, were pasted on tele phone poles there. 

BOULDER, Colo., Oct. 2 — The surge of reaction that swept campuses last spring aft er the United States incursion into Cambodia and the killing of students at two colleges was unprecedented in the history of American higher education, Dr. Clark Kerr, chairman of the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education, said today. 
MADRID, Oct. 2 (Reuters)— Ronald L. Ziegler, the White House press secretary, tonight described as speculative a re port that President Nixon was drawing up new proposals, pos sibly including a cease‐fire, for the Vietnam peace negotiations in Paris. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 2—Re publican ethnic leaders booed the keynote speaker at their annual conference today when he called for a quicker Ameri can withdrawal from Vietnam and indirectly criticized Vice President Agnew. 
TAIPEI. Taiwan. Saturday, Oct. 3 (UPI)—A United States Air Force C‐130 Hercules trans port, carrying 43 American servicemen, has been missing since yesterday afternoon and has been presumed lost in the northern Taiwan mountains, military sources said today. 
The voters of New York, two‐thirds of whom describe themselves as conservatives or moderates, are generally un happy with the way the coun try is going and almost one third still have not decided how to vote next month, according to the first findings of a state wide survey commissioned by The New York Times. 
 
The Columbia University Senate has turned down a proposed 10‐day election recess for its faculty members and students and voted instead to adopt a compromise recess to run from Oct. 30 to Nov. 2. 
LONDON. TODAY, BBC‐1 —the largest and most influential of Britain's tele vision channels—devotes the whole of its prime viewing time to a filmed reconstruction of the Chicago Eight conspiracy trial. 
PNOMPENH, Oct. 3—Adm. John S. McCain, commander of United States forces in the Pacific, arrived here today for a two‐day visit. 
SAIGON—Judging from the flow of press releases here last week, the American turnover of equipment and real estate to the South Vietnamese seems to be moving right along. The Air Force announced, for example, that one of its bases gave South Vietnam a telephone exchange, including “a telephone switching center and other telephone op erations supporting the free world forces.” 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3— About 20,000 advocates of a military victory in Vietnam gathered at the Washington Monument today to hear a plea from Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam for “the continued assistance of the American people and other peoples of the world.” 
Robert Shaplen is a gifted reporter, a man of humane and liberal instincts. He is also an Old Asia Hand, having covered the Pacific War, the Ko rean War, and — off and on — the 25‐year Indochina War. Since 1962 his “Letter from Saigon” has ap peared fairly regularly in The New Yorker. 
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, Oct. 3—President Nixon, who left here yesterday after a success ful 42‐hour visit that consoli dated official Yugoslav‐Amer ican relations with personal cordiality, gave as good as he got in long talks with his host, President Tito, knowledgeable sources said there. 
Senator George S. McGovern stumped the city yesterday in support of Representative Rich ard L. Ottinger, the Democratic candidate for Senator. 
As you know, we asked your son and another soldier to pose for photographs with Miss Dianna Lynn Batts (Miss U,S.A.) when she arrived in Los Angeles in prepara tion for her upcoming trip to Viet nam with the Bob Hope troupe. Your son requested a photograph and Mr. Ted Pettit of my office took his name and address. We then had Miss Batts autograph them for the boys. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 3—The Government announced today a dual exchange rate for its currency as part of a reform package aimed at halting in flation. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 3—A Government spokesman acknowledged today that Cam bodian planes had bombed a region around a Vietnamese refugee village in northwestern Cambodia. 
A former Times correspondent, concluding his third Vietnamese tour, looks at the war and the people, then and now, and peers uncertainly ahead
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3—The White House has told the Pentagon to plan on seeking an increase in defense spending next year. The increase would be considerably smaller than the Pentagon had been counting on, but it would represent the first upturn in military spend ing in three budget years. 
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Monday, Oct. 5 (AP)—United States and South Vietnamese troops repelled a company‐size North Vietnamese attack on an outpost south of Danang yester day, killing 11 enemy soldiers, the United States command said. 
KNOCKLONG, Ireland, Oct. — President Nixon conferred privately today with David K. E. Bruce and Philip C. Habib, his two negotiators at the Paris peace talks. 
Special to The New York Times
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 4 (UPI) — Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, United States com mander in Vietnam, left the hospital today to return to duty, spokesmen announced. He became dizzy during an Australian military ceremony last Wednesday and entered the hospital. The general is 56 years old.
SAIGON, Oct. 5 (Reuters)— United States troop strength in South Vietnam fell by 3,900 men last week, with 390,200 servicemen in the country as of Thursday, the United States command said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 5—Trinh Cong Son, a guitarist and composer whose antiwar songs have made him a heroic figure to many young Vietnamese, expects the war to stretch on and on. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5 (AP) —A 30‐year‐old Army sergeant will enter a courtroom at Fort Hood, Tex., tomorrow to defend himself against charges that he shot “about 30” Vietnamese in the tiny village of Sonmy. 
A Board of Education spokes man said yesterday he antici pated no change in the board's policy of noting student and teacher absences during war protests, such as the latest Viet nam Moratorium Day set for Oct. 15. Schools will be open that day, he said, and in full operation.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5—Pres ident Nixon pledged tonight, as he returned from Europe and the Mediterranean, that “the power of the United States, if necessary, will be used to de fend freedom, but never to destroy it.” 
DUBLIN, Oct. 5—President Nixon toured the green flats and hills of County Kildare to day, gave his endorsement to a disputed, finding that his an cestors lie buried there, and in voked their Quaker spirit to pledge himself to the works of peace. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 5 (UPI) —Christmas packages weighing more than five pounds and go ing to Vietnam by surface mail should be mailed between Oct. 12 and Nov. 7, the Defense De partment said today. Those weighing less than 5 pounds and carrying regular postage should be mailed between Oct. 19 and Nov. 21, it said. Regular air mail should be posted be tween Nov. 30 and Dec. 12.
BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. Thailand and North Vietnam resumed negotiations here to day over the repatriation of approximately 40,000 North Vietnamese refugees living in this country. The flow of returnees was halted in 1965 when the Hanoi Govern ment declared that American bombing prevented Its continua tion. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 5—Three student leaders were released from prison to day after a protest fast by them and by fellow students and sympathetic university professors. 
The current assault on campus vio lence may do more harm to student moderates than to bomb‐throwing radicals. The aims of those spear heading the campaigns are hard to fault: they want to stop the appalling arson and disruptions of learning. 
Early in his campaign for United States Senator from New Jersey, Nelsbn G. Gross incensed conservative Republicans and surprised everyone by taking sharp issue with the Nixon Administration on several major issues. Then in mid‐campaign, Mr. Gross abruptly changed direction, became an ardent Nixon man and implied—or let someone writing in his name imply—that his early liberal positions owed more to expediency than conviction. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 5 (AP)— Communist troops re portedly tried for 11 hours to overrun a Cambodian military base 57 miles southwest of here but were driven off early today in heavy fighting. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 6 (AP) — American servicemen miss ing in action or held as pris oners of war would be ex empted from income taxes under a bill introduced in the Senate today by Senator Richard S. Schweiker, Repub lican of Pennsylvania.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 6— Last‐minute legal technicalities were apparently cleared away today in the pending court‐mar tial of S. Sgt. David Mitchell, who is charged with participat ing in the alleged massacre of Vietnamese civilians in the vil lage of Sonmy more than two years ago. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Oct 6 (UPI) — Antiwar speakers are banned at Annapolis, accord ing to the commandant of the United States Naval Academy. “Opponents of the Vietnam war will not be allowed to address the 4,370 midshipmen, nor may students denounce the war in public,” Rear Ad miral Robert P. Googan said to the Marines Memorial Club here yesterday. “Whether we would encourage views con trary to the Administration is debatable. After all, when we are in uniform we are work ing for the President.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 6 (AP)—Intensified enemy mortar and rocket attacks re portedly carried through the third day today, most of them in the coastal provinces of the central and northern parts of South Vietnam. 
HACKENSACK, N. J.,—A Re publican incumbent who sup ports President Nixon's poli cies on Vietnam is defending his House seat against a vigor ous antiwar Democrat in New Jersey's suburban Seventh Con gressional District. But neither candidate is making the war the major theme of the cam paign. “Vietnam is no longer a to is sue,” says William B. Widnall, the 64‐ year ‐ old Republi can who has been in Congress since 1950. “The withdrawal is being accom plished, and I expect by Oct. 15 there will be an additional an nounced withdrawal that will be of a substantial nature.” 
LONDON, Oct. 6 (AP)— Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam said to day that he had been ordered by President Nguyen Van Thieu to return to Saigon im mediately. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 6—The wars in Vietnam and the Middle East have placed upon the American people a burden for which few of them were prepared by personal experience. Sel dom have the voters been expected to pass judgment on such delicate, com plicated and dangerous matters. Ac cordingly, we are bombarded and al most stunned by an endless debate in which the Administration and the Op position try to persuade or coerce the people into believing or accepting whatever thumping conclusion the speaker is peddling at the moment.
The hopes of the country and the world for an era of peace ride with the major new proposals President Nixon is to announce tonight for the Vietnam negotia tions in Paris. East‐West relations as a whole and the prospects for general détente could be advanced further by a Southeast Asian settlement than by any other diplomatic achievement now pending, except only for a solution in the Middle East. 
MOSCOW, Oct. 6—President Pompidou arrived today for an eight‐day visit to the Soviet Union and promptly called for joint Russian‐French exploita tion of Soviet mineral wealth. 
In November 1968 the American air war against North Vietnam came to a halt. But the squadrons that had pounded the Communists almost daily for 45 months remained. They were shifted to ground support missions in South Vietnam and Laos, attacks on the Ho Chi Minh Trail and, more recently, to targets in. Cambodia. The headlines gradually faded, but the air war did not. 
PARTS, Oct. 6 (AP) — A spokesman for the Vietcong del egation to the peace talks said today that he hoped President Nixon would announce accept ance of the Vietcong terms when he made his broadcast. 

INDIANAPOLIS, Oct. 5 — The actor dressed in a Viet cong uniform loaded his rifle and aimed it at the viewer. 
TAING KAUK, Cambodia, Oct. 6 (AP)—Jet bombers from air bases in South Vietnam bombed a suspected enemy bunker complex hidden in a village outside Taing Kauk to day after Cambodian troops ran into fire from the well‐con cealed positions.
President Nixon's far‐reaching five‐point proposal for the Paris talks, including a cease‐fire in place, fully war rants its advance description as a “major new initiative” for peace. Along with the recent eight‐point Vietcong plan, it provides for the first time a realistic agenda both sides can accept for the serious private negotiations needed to achieve a compromise solution. 
WASHINGTON, Oct 7— Fol lowing is a comparison of pro posals made by President Nixon tonight with the latest ones by the Vietcong, made on Sept. 17, plus proposals made by Mr. Nixon in June, 1969, and by the Vietcong in May, 1969: 
Revolution in Monetary Policy Urged

Prices on the London Stock Exchange were steady yester day. Trading was quiet in an ticipation of Wall Street's re action to President Nixon's speech on Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 7 (UPI) —The Government has dropped a charge of inciting to riot filed against Sgt. 1st Cl. James R. Kerns, a Green Beret veteran in Vietnam, who was accused of ripping up a Vietcong flag Saturday at the “March for Victory” rally here. The United States Attorney's office cited “lack of prosecutive evidence.”
Bond prices rose and interest rates declined yesterday, largely on the belief that Pres ident Nixon would disclose some major step toward peace in Vietnam in his television address last night. 
Good evening, my fellow Americans. Tonight I would like to talk to you about a major new initiative for peace. When I authorized operations against the enemy sanctuaries in Cambodia last April, I also directed that an intensive effort be launched to develop new ap proaches for mace in Indochina. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 7— There are two new elements in Presi dent Nixon's latest proposal for peace in Asia: a standstill cease‐fire throughout Indochina and a change of venue from the frustrated Paris talks to large, international conference at which the Soviet Union and Communist China would be welcomed. Both ideas have been around for a long time. Although they raise dozens of questions as out lined tonight, the critical ques tion is, Why now? 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 7— President Nixon asked Hanoi and the Vietcong tonight to join the allies in a standstill cease‐fire throughout Indo china. He also called for an Indochina peace conference to negotiate an end to the fighting in Laos and Cambodia as well as South Vietnam. 
PARIS, Oct. 7— A plea to President John F. Kennedy to avoid “the endless entangle ment” of intervention in Viet nam is disclosed in the first vol ume of Charles de Gaulle's new set of memoirs, which appeared by surprise in French book stores today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 7 (AP)—Ground fighting dwindled to small and scat tered encounters in South Viet nam today, but the enemy confirmed intensified shelling attacks for the fourth day.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 7 — Despite increased warnings of hardships and sacrifices ahead, Washington officials say North Vietnam appears deter mined to pursue the war in South Vietnam indefinitely, at least until a peace settlement can be reached on Hanoi's terms. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Oct. 8 — There was no immediate comment this, morning from President Ngu yen Van Thieu on the pro posals by President Nixon for settling the Indochina conflict, although Mr. Thieu is expected to support the United States, position. 
The automatic negativism of the initial Communist reaction in Paris to President Nixon's new five‐point Vietnam peace proposal is not surprising, and there is every reason still to hope for an ultimately favorable response. 
SAVANNAH, Ga., Oct. 8— On a quick visit to this con servative Southern city today, President Nixon said, “There's nothing like a Georgia wel come.” 
President Nixon's proposal for a standstill cease‐fire throughout Indochina drew mixed reactions from New York's three Senate candidates. 
 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 8 (AP)— The United States com mand reported today that 38 American servicemen were kill ed in action last week—the lowest number in four and a half years. 
LONDON, Oct. 8 — Britain today welcomed President Nixon's initiative to end the fighting in South Vietnam and gave her support to the recon vening of the Geneva Confer ence on Indochina. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8— The House approved today a $2 billion cut in the Nixon Ad ministration's defense budget but shouted down proposals for further reductions in military spending or the withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam 
WASHINGTON, Oct 8 — Congressional investigators re ported evidence today of “ap palling waste” in the supply system behind the United States war effort in South Vietnam. 

SAIGON, Friday, Oct. 9 (Reu ters) — North Vietnamese and Vietcong ground fire shot down three United States Army heli copters yesterday, two of them one‐half mile from Laos, the United States command report ed today. It said four crewmen were wounded in the crashes.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8—Part of the endless tragedy of Vietnam is that the men running the war know so little about one another or the people on the other side. Washington mis judged the history and psychology of the Vietnamese people for years, and this has cost us over 40,000 American lives and over a hundred billion dol lars, and now Hanoi and the Vietcong seem to be misjudging President Nixon's latest peace offer and the temper of the American people.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8 — The United States publicly urged the Soviet Union today to use its “considerable influence” with North Vietnam and the Vietcong to persuade them to accept President Nixon's proposal for a cease fire in Indochina. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 1—United States and South Vietnamese officials here be lieve that as Vietnamization has progressed, security has improved in large parts of the country and the effectiveness of the South Vietnamese Army has increased. 
PARIS, Oct. 8 (AP) — Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam left for Saigon today after a two‐week stay in Paris and London. He refused to see reporters and give his reaction to President Nixon's proposals for a cease‐fire in the Vietnam war.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 8 — In the view of senior American military planners, a “cease‐fire, in place” throughout Indochina, as proposed last night by President Nixon, could be dis astrous to the Saigon Govern ment unless it was effectively supervised. 
KEY BISCAY‐NE, Fla., Oct. 8 (UPI)—Mrs. Richard M. Nixon said today that she thought her husband's Southeast Asia peace address was marvelous and add ed, “I hope they were listening abroad.” She arrived here for a long weekend of relaxation with the President.
Newspapers supporting Pres ident Nixon's Vietnam policy and newspapers that have op posed it joined yesterday in approval of his new cease‐fire proposals. 
PARIS, Oct. 8 — The Com munist delegations to the Viet nam peace talks denounced President Nixon's five peace proposals today as “a maneuver to deceive world opinion” and held fast to their demands for unconditional and total Amer ican troop withdrawal and the overthrow of the “puppet” lead ers in Saigon. 

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 9 (AP)—The United States concentrated all its B‐52's on Laos today as nearly 30 of the bombers pounded the enemy supply lines. 
LONDON, Oct. 9— After all the turns of American policy in Vietnam, all the deception of ourselves and others, any new peace plan must face critical scrutiny. President Nixon's initiative has inevitably met, along with praise for the effort, skepticism about its real meaning and its chance of moving the two sides any nearer a settlement. 
Literary manuscripts, type scripts and autographs, modern first editions, posters and water‐colors brought $9,000 on Thursday night at an auction sponsored by Publishers for Peace, a book industry group opposed to the war in Indo china. The proceeds will be used to help elect Congressional candidates who oppose the con flict. 
PHOENIX, Ariz., Oct. 9—Vice President Agnew voiced a note of caution tonight about repres sion of “political terrorists,” warning that it could play into the hands of those who want to destroy the American sys tem. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 9— South Vietnamese and Amer ican officials are puzzling over the kind of truce President Nixon has suggested for Indo china. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 9.—The Nixon Administration publicly urged North Vietnam today to accept President Nixon's new peace plan for Indochina, with the added inducement that most American troops would be out of combat there by May 1. 
FORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 10— In a well‐guarded wooden bung alow that serves as a court room at this Army post in the rolling hills of Central Texas, the court‐martial of S. Sgt. David Mitchell is slowly going forward through a thicket of legal maneuvers. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 10 (UPI)—Two Norwegian sea mew—who were injured in an explosion aboard the freighter Tore Knudson 200 miles off the coast of Vietnam—were picked up by American helicopters today and taken to a United States hospital at Camranh Bay, American officials said.
What Kind of Power Plant?
SYDNEY, Australia, Oct. 10— Australian university students, normally eager to keep pace with their counterparts else where in styles and attitudes, are divided on the issues of radicalism and the Vietnam war. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10 — The armed forces believe that their public image has become tarnished and that the older men at the top are having trou ble communicating with the young men who fill the ranks. 
In the past four days, the war in Indochina and the Vietnam negotiations in Paris have both been trans formed in the world's eyes by President Nixon's dramatic October 7 peace initiative and its near‐universal ap proval at home and in non‐Communist countries abroad. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10— Ad ministration officials declined to comment tonight on the North Vietnamese statement pending a study of its text, but said that they were “intrigued” by it. 
“He's still there.”


FORT LEWIS, Wash., Oct. 10—Five of six soldiers who allegedly refused orders in June to transfer to units in preparation for shipment to Vietnam are scheduled to go on trial here next week. 
HONG KONG, Sunday, Oct. 11—Communist China has de nounced President Nixon's peace plan for Indochina as “an out and‐out fraud” and “a deceit ful trick to legalize aggression in the whole of Indochina.” 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 10—You can put it down as a fairly dependable rule that serious proposals between na tions, and particularly between the United States and the Communist coun tries, must be made in private. There are exceptions, of course, but “Bohlen's Law” is that privacy is the mark of diplomacy and publishing Is propa ganda. 
MOSCOW, Oct. 10—The So viet Union today dismissed President Nixon's Indochina peace proposals as “a great fraud” and aligned its policy firmly behind the Vietnamese Communists. 
PARIS, Oct. 10— Herbert R. Rainwater, national commander in chief of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, said today that he had been unable to present North Vietnamese representa tives here with petitions bear ing some four million signatures asking the releas eof and better treatment for American prison ers of war. 
WASHINGTON—There is some thing about the autumn of Amer ican election years that enlivens the diplomacy surrounding the war in Vietnam. In 1964, 1966, 1968 and now again in 1970, Washington and Hanoi have re defined their positions, sent out new probes and, on one occa sion, even struck a bargain as they vied for the sympathies of the American electorate, whose tolerance of the war they recog nized as probably the most im portant variable in the negotia tions. 
It is nearly two and a half years now since that March morning in 1968 when American troops of the Americal Divi sion's Task Force Barker at tacked the village of Sonmy in South Vietnam, stayed a few hours and left behind burning houses and crops and, allegedly, about 500 dead men, women and children in one of the village's subhamlets. And it is nearly year since news of what has come to be called the Sonmy massacre broke with shocking impact.
The pace of New York State's Senate campaign slowed some what yesterday, with two can didates issuing detailed papers and the third speaking upstate. 

MOSCOW, Oct. 11 (UPI) Raul Castro, Cuba's Defense Minister and the brother of Premier Fidel Castro, conferred here today with the Soviet De fense Ministers Marshal Andrei A. Grechko; other Soviet gen erals, and Maj. Gen. Cham Sham, Deputy Defense Minister of North Vietnam. Tass, the Soviet press agency reported Mr. Castro and General Sham were said to be enrounte to Warsaw Pact maneuvers, pre sumably in East Germany.
The alternative to accords with the Soviet Union limiting strategic’ arms and resolving other pressing problems “ is a “tremendous increase” in defense spending, Secretary of Defense Laird warned yesterday in a joint television appearance with Secretary of State Rogers. Mr. Rogers added that the Administration does not regard the initial Communist criticism of President Nixon's Vietnam peace proposals as a final rejection of the United States plan. [Page 1, Col. 8.]
BONN, Oct. 11—President Tito was reported to have said here today that he had been “impressed by the way President Nixon presented his case” on the Middle East crisis and other international issues.
In the first mutual television appearance of their campaign, the three candidates for United States Senator from New York injected a few personal jabs yesterday into a generally calm discussion of their principal points of difference on crime, foreign affairs, the environment and the economy.
WASHINGTON, Oct, 11— The Nixon Administration said today that the United States may have to embark on a “tre mendous increase” in defense spending unless accords are reached with the Soviet Union in negotiations on the limita tion of strategic arms and in other areas.
NHONHOA, South Vietnam, Oct. 3 — “Health Is Gold,” a little sign tacked onto a coco nut tree says in Vietnamese. “Sanitation Makes the Hamlet Cheerful.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Oct. 11 (Reuters)—An American Air Force reconnaissance jet dis appeared on a flight over Laos and is presumed to have crashed, the United States com mand said today.
The antiwar activists are members of the steering com mittee of the National Peace Action Coalition. The coalition, formed at a conference of 1,500 persons last June in Cleveland, consists adult and student peace groups.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 12—With the dry season approaching, North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in Laos are beginning to ship supplies southward along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, according to un official renorts.
NASHVILLE, Oct. 10—Two months ago, it was rather wide ly expected that Senator Albert Gore, the liberal Democrat and Vietnam war critic, would be this year's main victim of the Nixon Administration's “South ern strategy.”
President Nixon announced yesterday that 40,000 more troops would be withdrawn from South Vietnam by Christmas. The White House said that the reduction does not represent a withdrawal beyond the 150,000 men to be brought home by next spring. Meanwhile, Defense Secretary Mel vin R. Laird said that he hoped to do away with draft calls entirely by the middle of 1973. [Page 1, Columns 2–3.]
PARIS, Oct. 12 (Reuters)— Hanoi and Vietcong officials tonight dismissed President Nixon's decision to pull 40,000 United States soldiers out of Vietnam by Christmas as an other move to fool American opinion before the Congression al election.
Armenta Adams, a beautifully black pianist with a big tone and large ambitions, gave a recital Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall in memory of her friend Philippa Schuyler, the musician and author Who died in a South Vietnam heli copter crash in 1967. Miss Admas, aiming at a suitable memorial, played a Beethoven sonata (Op. 2, No. 2); the world premiere of Hank Johnson”s “Khan” Earth Fantasie, and for a mammoth coda, Bach's “Gold herg” Variations.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 12—Since the beginning of a campaign three weeks ago to eliminate “dishonest elements” in the Saigon area, many young people here feel, the Govern ment has tried to suppress the “new youth culture” by de stroying one of its most sacred symbols, long hair.
MIAMI BEACH, Fla., Oct. 12 —The deficit in the Federal Government's budget will range between $12‐billion and $20‐ billion during the current fiscal year, ending next June 30, Representative Wilbur D. Mills said here today.
PARIS, Oct. 12 — Before agreeing to a cease‐fire or the freeing of prisoners, the Com munist delegations at the Viet nam peace talks are insisting on a firm American commit ment for total withdrawal of United States forces by a speci fic date.
HARTFORD, Oct 12—Presi dent Nixon made a four‐hour swing through Connecticut to day with the Republican can didates for Governor and the United States Senate at his side.
A 1966 Cadillac limousine that once whisked members of the Beatles, the Cream, the Jefferson Airplane and other top rock groups to their des tinations—was auctioned for. $1,400 at the Fillmore East, theater last night in a benefit for peace candidates.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 12— President Nixon announced to day that the United States would withdraw 40,000 troops from Vietnam between now and Christmas.
To the Editor: Harold B. Scott of the United States Department of Commerce charges (letter Sept! 24) that your Aug. 20 editorial entitled “Disastrous Trade Bill” reflects “incomplete understand ing” of the Administration's DISC proposal. That proposal would allow exporters to reduce their taxes by forming Domestic International Sales Corporations.
LONDON, Oct. 137 (AP)— The South Vietnamese Gov ernment plans to offer the Vietcong a new basis for a Political settlement soon, United States sources report ed tonight.
A group of, Negro business men and community figures de fended Samuel J. Lefrak yes terday against charges by the Federal Government that he had practiced racial discrimina tion in renting apartments.
Forty leading members of peace groups endorsed Sena tor Charles E. Goodell yester day.
Unpacking his bags, the American back from Europe finds some curious souvenirs. Item: Glass from a shattered car window, hit by a rock hurled in Copenhagen by students demonstrating against Robert S. McNamara, president of the World Bank and former Secretary of Defense. Item, Swedish politician talking “Vietnam was not an issue in the election campaign. No body would de fend United States policy.” item: American banker based In Europe: “I have never heard so much pessimism and unease ex pressed about the United States.” Item: Sign in window of Swiss hair‐dressing shop: “Our wigs made from Swiss hair.”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 13 (Reuters)—The United States Command reported to day that 10 Americans had been killed and 24 wounded in two days of fighting.
Chalk up another victory for Vietnamization. The Saigon constabulary, in a grand swords‐into‐plowshares gesture, is using bayonets to cut local youths unpatri otically long hair. Such an extension of police activity will undoubtedly be the envy of those American disciples of law and order who have long believed that permis siveness is the last refuge of scoundrels.
FORT LEWIS, Wash., Oct 13 (AP) — Courts‐martial for six soldiers charged with refusing to report to a personnel center here for processing to Vietnam have been postponed to Oct, 26–28. The six were to have been tried today and tomor row, but the sessions were post; poned on a motion by their de fense attorney, who said he bad another court appearance in Seattle.
Contrary to widespread public im pression the major problems besetting higher education in America today are not those associated with violence but the decline of academic standards: The general public is probably unaware that a growing proportion of college students are subject to fewer and fewer requirements and less and less evaluation than ever before.
MOSCOW, Oct. 13—President Pompidou and President Nikolai V. Podgorny today signed a French‐Soviet agreement to “extend and deepen” political contacts and to hold consulta tions during periods of interna tional tension.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 13—The gates swing open at 10 A.M. and hundreds of perspiring, white‐shirted fathers, colorfully dressed moth ers and bare‐legged high‐school girls shuffle small children into position to begin the tour of exhibits of the first Saigon trade fair since 1961.
PORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 13— The civilian defense attorney for Mr. David Mitchell, who is being Court‐martialed here in connection With the alleged massacre at sonny, South Viet nam, lost a bid today to sub poena high officials of the Central intelligence Agency.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 13 (AP) —Anti‐war demonstrations are being planned for 31 cities three days before the Nov. 3 general elections, much to the dismay of some dovish candi dates who fear adverse reac tions at the polls.
To the Editor: During this 25th anniversary of the United Nations, it is fitting that the organization set a new goal for the future. The goal could well be for the nations of the world to abandon war as a means for settling disputes.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 14 — Once again the polls and the politicians are at odds over how the nation will vote, and their differences highlight some of the most intriguing uncertain ties of the 1970 campaign.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 14 —S. Sgt. David Mitchell for mally entered a plea of not guilty today to a charge of as sault to commit murder of at least 30 unarmed South Viet namese civilians some 31 months ago in the hamlet of Mylai 4 in the village of Sonmy.
I marched with Martin Luther King at Selma, and voted for Barry Gold water for President. My favorite con temporary writers are Norman Mailer and William F. Buckley Jr. I am a registered Republican, a longhair, a capitalist, a grass smoker, a Vietnam hawk, a rock freak.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 14 (AP)—South Vietnamese forces today reported fighting at three points along the Cam bodian frontier against North Vietnamese troops reinfiltrat ing into their former sanctuary areas.
ATLANTA, Oct. 14 (UPI)— Charles L. Weltner, a lawyer, said today that more charges growing out of the alleged mas sacre at Mylai would be lodged against high‐ranking Army offi cers, including “one with at least four stars.”
Two of the three candidates running for the United States Senate campaigned upstate yes terday and the third, in New, York City, held a brief news conference to talk about the problem of controlling opium Production in Turkey.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 14 (UPI) —The Rev. Carl McIntire an nounced today plans for a series of monthly “patriots marches for victory in Viet nam,” culminating in a rally at the Washington Monument on May 8.
Vietnam is itself many crises. It is the crisis of the draft, and what that has done to students and colleges. It is one of the chief causes of the crisis over political activity on the campus, for it is one of the main occasions for political activity on the campus. It raises the question of the proper function of the university, for university sponsored advice and research plays a role, and no minor one, in Viet nam. It has contributed to the stripping of respect and awe from authority, for it is the greatest failure of government, perhaps, in Amer ican history. It is in this last sense that the impact of Vietnam on the campus crisis is most serious.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 14—Authoritative Cambodian sources attached reservations today to the Government's en dorsement of President Nixon's peace proposal for Indochina.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 14 — North Vietnam to night officially rejected Presi dent Nixon's week‐old propo sals for peace in Indochina.
A student's father has suc cessfully sued New York Uni versity for a tuition refund of $277.40 because the school canceled classes for 19 days during student demonstrations last May.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 15 —An unexpected snarl de veloped today in the court martial of S. Sgt. David Mitch ell.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 15 (Reuters) — Forty‐six Americans were killed in Viet nam last week, eight more than the previous week, the United States command said today.
To the Editor: While any meaningful effort toward peace is noteworthy, the pre‐election peace proposal by President Nixon in troduced only one forceful new ele ment to the Paris negotiations — do mestic politics.
ROME, Oct. 15 — Vice Pres ident Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam had a long audience with Pope Paul VI that had not, been previously announced and was shorn of official protocol.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 15 The White House refused to day to accept North Vietnam's rejection of President Nixon's latest peace proposals as final, and emphasized instead its willingness to compromise in the negotiations in Paris.
PRINCETON, N.J., Oct. 15— Thousands of college students enrolled under the banner of the Movement for a New Con gress will begin intensive cam paigning next week on behalf of House and Senate candidates who favor the students’ goals of immediate peace in Vietnam and a reordering of national priorities.
Blood was donated, fiery speeches were delivered and 10,000 signatures were put on petitions here yesterday in series of antiwar rallies, the largest of which drew 300 peo ple.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 15—Last Jan. 6, the Nixon Administra tion announced a pilot project of storefront “postal academies” that would use the employee and resources of the post of fices to give high school drop outs remedial education, coun seling and part‐time jobs.
PARIS, Oct. 15— The Com munist delegations at the Viet nam peace talks declared to day that their rejection of Pres ident Nixon's peace proposals was “firm, total and categori cal,” but the. United States re fused to accept this as a final answer.
WASHINGTON. Oct. 15 [UPI) —The Defense Department an nounced today that the fol lowing servicemen from the New York area had been killed in Southeast Asia:
When Mme. Nguyen Thi Binh, rep resenting the Provisional Revolution ary Government (PRG) of South Viet nam, put forward an 8‐point program to end the war a few weeks ago, it was shrugged off here as “nothing new.”
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Oct. 16—Foreign Minister Mah moud Riad of the United Arab Republic accused the United States today of having misled President Gamal Abdel Nasser into accepting a Middle East cease‐fire.
President Nixon's announcement that another 40,000 troops will be brought home from Vietnam by Christmas is clearly a curtain‐raiser for the campaign swing he begins this morning. Politics also is undoubtedly a factor in Secretary of Defense Laird's announced plan to do away with draft calls by July 1, 1973. Unfortunately, the fine print does not quite meet the expectations both announcements have created.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 16 (AP) —Secretary of the Army Stan ley R. Resor has dismissed allegations by a soidier‐defend ant who charged Gen. William C. Westmoreland with over all responsibility for the ac tions of his troops in the alleged Sonmy massacre, it was announced today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 16 (AP)—United States B‐52 bombers pounded the Ho Chi Minh Trail in southern Laos again today, the eighth consecutive day of raids against the Vietnamese supply lifeline, United States military spokes men said.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17 (AP) —American casualties in South Vietnam have dropped to the level where nearly as many men die from accidents, illness or disease as are killed in combat.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17— Secretary of State William P. Rogers flew home today with a report for President Nixon that he had rejected Soviet pres sures for a quick start of Arab Israeli talks without rectifica tion of violations of the Middle East cease‐fire.
PINE BUSH, N.Y., Oct. 17 (AP)—A colorful parade drew nearly 4,000 persons to this Catskill Mountains community today to honor veterans of the war in Vietnam who, the parade's organizers say, often face “psychological defeat” at home.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 17 — President Nixon's peace proposals for Indochina have succeeded at least in fo cusing the attention of people other than creditors on the In ternational Control Com mission.
SAIGON, Oct. 17 (AP)—The United States withdrawal from Vietnam entered another phase today. Three units consisting of nearly 2,000 men were pulled out of combat as the first step to deactivation in the near fu ture.
Standing In the entry to a Brooklyn shoe store, huddled against the chill gusts that blustered along Fulton Street, Senator Charles E. Goodell charged p yesterday that his Democratic opponent, Repre sentative Richard L. Ottinger, had “flummoxed” the public about Vietnam.
MINNEAPOLIS, Oct. 17— Hubert H. Humphrey has stated that he erred in saying that President Johnson was “para noid” about the war in 1968.
GREEN BAY, Wis., Oct. 17— President Nixon encountered vocal hecklers in Teterboro, N. J., today as he went on a four‐state barnstorming tour to urge the “silent majority” to “answer” dissidents and radicals with their votes in November.
COLOMBO, Ceylon—Shortly after the leftist Government was swept into power on an ariticapitalistic platform in the election last May, some over enthusiastic workers began taking over factories, issuing checks and otherwise reveling in the fruits of production— until the checks bounced.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct. 17 (Agence France‐Presse) The Cambodian authorities have drawn up an emergency plan to save the bulk of Cambodia's rice harvest from being cap tured by Vietcong and North Vietnamese troons.
JAMES P. STERBA just completed a 16‐month tour of duty as a Saigon correspondent for The Times.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 17—A member of a House subcommit tee that studied the alleged Sonmy massacre in Vietnam to day described as a defense “ploy” a demand for a tran script of House hearings on the case.
Unemployment and inflation are becoming increasingly im portant issues to voters in up state cities, according to a statewide survey commissioned by The New York Times.
PRINCETON, N. J., Oct. 17— Since his cease‐fire proposal and trip to Europe, President Nixon's popularity has register ed an increase of three percent age points over an early Sep tember rating, according to the Gallup poll. The latest figure is 59 per Cent, the highest record ed since July.
ATHENS, Ga., Oct. 17—Dean Rusk's favorite portrait of Ben jamin Franklin hangs on a pan eled wall at the former Secre tary of State's new office at the University of Georgia Law School.
Richard Hughes, a young ac tor who went to Saigon and es tablished four hostels for home less Vietnamese street urchins, found an “angel” for his project last week.
NEW DELHI, Oct. 18 (Reu ters)—Prime Minister Indira Gandhi called today for the, complete withdrawal of United States forces from Vietnam. She termed American with drawal the key to a settlement in Southeast Asia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 18 (AP) — United States B‐52 bombers extended their raids on North Vietnamese sup ply routes from Laos into Cam bodia for the first time in more than a week, the United States command announced today.
In another autumn of war without fanfare in Vietnam, the chances of an American soldier getting wounded, and surviving with a broken body, still remain very high. Despite an encour aging drop in battlefield deaths, Viet nam by its very nature continues to be a dangerous, bloody war. The dimensions of America's own “body count” cannot be buried by Vietnami zation or optimistic rhetoric.In the week in which the Presi dent made his latest peace proposals, 666 Americans were wounded in ac tion. The usual listing of American deaths stresses that the killed‐in‐action ratio is dropping. That, fortunately, is true; but, it still leaves about fifty deaths reported in an average “good” week. And that does not include about 200 South Vietnamese and 1,200 North Vietnamese and Vietcong who die weekly, much less the civilians who are maimed without statistics.
VALPARAISO, Chile, Oct 18 —Salvador Allende, the Marx ist who is expected to become Chile's President, assured a large audience of businessmen today that 98 per cent of Chil eans would have “nothing to fear” from his government.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 18—The issue that has dominated politi cal discussion in the United States for five years and did much to cause Lyndon B. John son not to seek re‐election— the war in Indochina—seems to be playing a minor role in the 1970 mid‐term Congressional elections.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 18—The Central Intelligence Agency has told President Nixon that the Vietnamese Communists have infiltrated more than 30,000 agents into the South Vietna mese Government in an appa ratus that has been virtually impossible to destroy.
CHICAGO, Oct. 19 — Vice President Agnew portrayed himself today as the victim of a “hate” campaign, abetted by the nation's press.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 19 (UPI) —The Defense Department to day identified 18 servicemen killed in the war in Vietnam. They included the following Army men from the New York area:
Hanoi's formal rejection of President Nixon's peace initiative is a cause for disappointment, not despair. Am bassador Bruce's refusal to take no for an answer, was the proper response. Both sides have now publicly be littled the other's new public proposals. But both have also upgraded their negotiating teams; they give evidence of having more important aims than simply taking advan tage of propaganda opportunities in Paris. Intensive probing in private is now in order to discover whether progress toward a settlement can be made.
TOKYO, Oct. 19 (AP)—Rich ard Helms, United States Di rector of Central Intelligence, was touring southern Japan today on what the United States Embassy said was a “personal vacation.” Mr. Helms arrived yesterday from Saigon after a two‐day visit that included a conference with President Nguyen Van Thieu.
SAIGON, South Vietnam Tuesday, Oct. 20 (AP)—Ameri can troop strength in Vietnan was reported yesterday to be 378,900 men. The United States command said that is was the lowest total since Dec 24, 1966, when the authorized strength stood at 376,000.
ATLANTIC City, N. J., Oct. 19—Senater Mike Mansfield, the Senate majority leader, pre dicted today that serious ne goliations to end the war in Vietnam will get under way in the next several months.
CHICAGO, Oct. 19—At the request of United States At torney William J. Bauer, all conspiracy charges against Bobby G. Seale, national chair man of the Black Panther party, were dismissed today by Judge Julius J. Hoffman.
WASHINGTON Oct. 19 (AP) —Gen. Lewis W. Walt, the No. 2 man in the United States Ma rine” Corps and a veteran of three wars, will retire Feb. 1 The Pentagon, in announcing the retirement today, said that General Walt, 57 years old, would be replaced as assistant commandant of the Marine Corps by Lieut. Gem Keith B. McCutcheon, 55, a pioneer in Marine aviation. General Mc Cutcheon is now commander of Marine forces in Vietnam.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 19 — A former member of the infan try company that swept through the South Vietnamese hamlet of Mylai 4 in 1968 testified today that screaming women, children and old men had been pushed into a.ditch and shot by S. Sgt. David Mitchell and Sec ond Lieut. William‐ L. Calley Jr. Another former member said that he had observed both men standing at the edge of the ditch but had seen only the lieutenant fire.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 20—The United States Army has awarded a Silver Star for valor to a general in Vietnam based on a descrip tion of acts of heroism in Cambodia that were invented by enlisted men under orders.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 20 —Al most half of the Army generals who served in Vietnam last year brought back medals for bravery in combat. Few more than 1 in 10 average service men not similar awards.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 20 (AP)—A Vietcong unit was reported to have ambushed an American convoy today 200 yards from a South Korean out post in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam.
Senator Eugene J. McCarthy, the peace movement candidate for President in 1968, compared the antiwar credentials of the Democratic and Republican candidates for Senator from New York yesterday. As he saw it, the Democrat won.
HOUSTON, Oct. 20 — The 3.5‐million member Episcopal Church, meeting here in trien nial general convention, agreed, today to transmit to its 90 dioceses for study a plan of union that would merge nine major Protestant denominations into one church with a total membership of 25 million.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 20 —The prosecution in the court martial of S. Sgt. David Mitchell for his role in the al eged massacre of civilians in the South Vietnamese hamlet of Mylai 4 unexpectedly rested its case today after calling three witnesses to the stand.
BINGHAMTON, N. Y., Oct. 20—James L. Buckley, the Con servative party candidate for the United States Senate, was sharply questioned today by 750 students in a lecture ball at Harpur College of the State University.
Foreign Minister Gromyko's meeting tomorrow with President Nixon and his lengthy private talks in New York with Secretary of State Rogers come at a crucial point for the Administration's policy of negotiation, not confrontation. Substantive discussion of such subjects as the Middle East, Vietnam Berlin and the strategic arms limitation talks (SALT) ‘has been overtaken by more fundamental question: good faith. The United States has been trying to communicate that one simple message for weeks, while probing for Russia's future intentions.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 20 — With two weeks to go, the 1970 election campaign shows every indication of remaining one of history's great nondebates.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 20 — Exactly one month after order ing the bombing of North Viet nam in February, 1965—a date marking a significant escalation of the war—President Johnson told his wife that he saw no way out of American involve ment.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 21—Re ports from Saigon that the United States and South Viet nam might announce a uni lateral cease‐fire in Vietnam before the end of the month drew a categorical denial today from the White House. According to the Saigon re ports, President Nguyen van Thieu has instructed his com manders in the four military regions and provincial gover nors and town mayors to pro vide maximum security in preparation for such a cease fire.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Oct. 21— The court martial of S. Sgt. David Mitchell was postponed today until tomorrow at the earliest to allow defense at torneys time to round up wit nesses to testify on the alleged mass killing at the South Viet namese hamlet of Mylai 4. The trial of Sergeant Mitchell on a charge of assault with in tent to murder some 30 South Vietnamese civilians in the hamlet was thrown into disar ray yesterday when the trial counsel, or prosecutor, sudden ly rested his case after just three witnesses had been heard.
Overconsumption of Fuels
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 21 (AP)—B‐52 bombers pounded the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos today for the 13th consecutive day in an attempt to halt the flow of enemy supplies to South Vietnam and Cambodia. Ground activities involving United States forces were light and scattered in South Vietnam, but the Vietcong, in a mortar barrage, damaged a United States Navy support base in the Mekong delta.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Oct. 21—Premier Golda Meir of Is rael and Foreign Minister An drei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union underlined the deadlock in the Middle East today by de livering diametrically opposed statements to the General As sembly on the terms for re opening Arab‐Israeli peace talks.
KYOTO, Japan, Oct. 21 (AP) —About 300 religious leaders ended a six‐day international conference for world peace here today and unanimously adopted resolutions calling for an immediate cease‐fire in Viet nam and a “prompt” halt to South Africa's racial policy. The resolution on Vietnam also demanded that all foreign governments immediately with draw military assistance to both North and South Vietnam.
PARIS, Oct. 21—After two months of talking to the Viet nam Communists, David H. E. Bruce, the chief American ne gotiator at the peace talks here, has found himself in much the same deadlock as his pred ecessor, Henry Cabot Lodge, and there are indications that he is feeling the same dis couragement. In the American view, the Communists continue to insist that Washington solve their political problem for them by getting rid of the present Sai gon Government of President Nguyen Van Thieu and allow ing the establishment of a coali tion on Communist terms. Thus the Americans hear, week in and week out, the demand that they abandon the “puppet” re gime they., have “imposed on the Vietnamese people.”
FORT WAYNE, Ind., Oct. 20—It is delivered without text, stream‐of‐consciousness style; but there is nothing unconscious or accidental in the design of the message that President Nixon brought here last night and plans to carry into every close Sen ate race across the country.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 21 (AP)—President Nixon told Postmaster General Winton M. Blount today to go to Hanoi, if that is necessary and possible, to deliver Christmas Mail to American prisoners of war in North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 21—The Army today announced an official investigation into the award bf a silver Star for valor to a general in Vietnam on the basis of a citation written from the imagination of an enlisted man. Brig. Gen, Eugene P. For rester, who learned on Monday that his medal was a source of dispute, was‐still not available for comment today.
I'd like to welcome the three of you to The Times—Governor Rockefeller, Mr. Goldberg, Dr. Adams. We're delight ed that you've agreed to come together here for your first three‐way debate of the campaign. We hope your answers to the questions our reporters will pose will help clarify some of the major issues of the campaign for our readers and we're confident that we'll all leave this conference room enlightened and with no bloodshed.
Governor Rockefeller and Arthur J. Goldberg tensely ex changed such phrases as “mis leading the public” and “half truths” yesterday in the first debate of the three candidates for Governor.
TUCSON, Ariz., Oct. 22 Vice President Agnew accused the Democrats tonight of try ing “to panic the electorate” with charges that the Nixon Administration had failed to stein inflation. “One must take this tilted in dignation for what it is — po litical sophistry — and no more credible than their sudden zeal to impersonate Wyatt Earp,” the Vice President said.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 22—Among the men who make the Army their life, there was sadness as they talked of the enlisted men who went to the press and Congress to complain of a fault in the sys tem.
President Nicolae Ceausescu of Rumania expressed hope yesterday for improved rela tions with the United. States but also criticized American foreign policy.
PARIS, Oct. 22—The Vietna mese Communists said today that they “totally, globally, ca tegorically and definitively” re jected President Nixon's “so called peace initiative” of Oct. 7, terming it a “swindle” aimed at helping the Republicans in the coming American elections.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22— President Nixon met for more than two hours today with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko, for talks that both sides described in positive terms. But no specific progress was disclosed on the wide range of issues discussed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 22 (AP)—The United States command announced to day that 40 Americans were killed in action in Vietnam last week, six fewer than the week before and the second lowest weekly toll in four and a half years.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 22 Three weeks after their spokes men denounced the Vietnam war, members of an officers organization are facing armed forces retaliation, according to the dissenters.
“We reject it totally, globally, definitively and categorically.”—Nguyen Thank Le, the North Vietnam ese press spokesman, commenting at the Paris peace talks on President Nixon's peace plan. [10:5.]
Because of a transmission error, an Associated Press dis patch from Washington pub lished in The New York Times last Sunday said that eight Americans had been killed in action in South Vietnam during the week ended Oct. 3. The cor rect figure is 38.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Oct 22—Reliable sources have re ported that three Cambodian battalions—about 1,500 men— are at an American Special Forces, camp in southern Laos for commando training and possible use in the Laotian Cambodian border region.
In the matter of Vietnam, Charles Brace len Flood, the novelist, is a hawk, troubled hawk, but one who believes that if the Vietcong take over in South Viet nam, the situation for the Vietnamese will be worse than It is now and that a blood bath would be inevitable. But his long, THE WAR OF THE INNOCENTS. By Charles Bracelen Flood. 480 pages. McGraw‐Hill. $7.95. factual account of a year's stay with American fighting men in that country, airmen, advisers, infantry, is really a first person record of what sort of war it and how it is being fought, or at least was fought in 1967, the year he was there.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 23—Nineteen ships of the, United States Seventh Fleet, ranging from aircraft carriers to tugs, are going home from Vietnam to be retired from ac tive service, the Navy said to day.
VUNGTAU, South Vietnam, Oct. 23 (AP) — President Nguyen Van Thieu and South Vietnam's top military and political leaders mapped strategy today for a cease fire or a prolonged Indochina war. Gathered for an extraor dinary conference in this cpastal resort city about 40 miles southeast of Saigon, the South Vietnamese leaders discussed what actions they would take if the Viet Cong accepted President Nixon's Oct. 7 peace proposal.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 23 (Agence France‐Presse)—A North Vietnamese commentator predicted today that President Nixon would “intensify and ex tend” the Vietnam war once next month's congressional elections in the United States were out of the way.
HARTFORD, Oct. 23—Vice President Agnew called Mayor Lindsay of New York “our po litical conglomerate” here to night. He also criticized the Mayor and others who have defended draft resisters.
MOSCOW, Oct. 23 (AP)— The Soviet Union has agreed to provide North Vietnam with additional military and eco nomic assistance. Tass, the So viet press agency, reported to day.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 23—Troops of the Amer ical Division have violated Pentagon order by continuing to use a chemical defoliant identified as a factor in ani mal birth defects, the United States command said today.
The current war is destroying un told human and material resources South Vietnam. Not including the forces of the N.L.F., the army of the Republic of Vietnam numbers 1,000, 000 men; to this figure must be added the forces of self‐defense numbering 1.000,000 men, and police forces num bering 100,000 men.
BONN, Oct. 23—Chancellor Willy Brandt land his coalition partner, Foreign Minister Walter Scheel, held a joint news conference today to ex press confidence that they could surmount opposition pres sure and continue governing un til their term ran out in 1973.
The city Board of Education has offered to set up special educational programs for hos pitalized veterans of the war in Vietnam.
HANOI, North Vietnam, Oct. 24 (Agence France‐Presse)—A decree for the protection of government property has been promulgated by President Ton Duc Thang, the newspaper Nhan Dan reported today.
KNOXVILLE, Tenn., Oct. 24 (AP) — Two University of Tennessee student have been sentenced to the Knox County Workkhouse on disorderly con duct charges stemming from President Nixon's visit to the Billy Graham Crusade on the campus last May 28.
Last January, a special Presi dential task force submitted rec ommendations on the needs of higher education to the White House. The document — and covering letter by Dr. James M. Hester, president of New York University and chairman of the group — remained under wraps until recently, when it was made public without comment or ex planation.
WASHINGTON. Oct. 24 (UPI) —The number of Vietnam vet erans receiving disability com pensation has risen from 8.287 ao 188,353 in less than threel years, the Veterpn5 Aclministra tion has announced. Compensa tion to veterans disabled while on active duty in the armed services during the Vietnam war now totals more than $285‐ million a year, the V.A. said Thursday.
Trouble for a judge is the judge giving an order and some one disobeying it. Last week, in a crowded courtroom on the 13th floor of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, John M. Murtagh had trouble.
To the Editor: Arthur Goldberg's response of firing two of his campaign aides who were heckling Governor Rockefeller during a campaign appearance on the Lower East Side deserves a bit more reflec tion than it was apparently given.
LONGBINH, South Vietnam, Oct. 13—Pfc. John McIntell, a 23‐year‐old electrician from the Bronx, is not cheered by Presi dent Nixon's announcement of the accelerated withdrawal of troops from Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 24 (AP)—A typhoon cut into allied military operations today as it moved inland to ward the northern coast of South Vietnam and forced pre cautionary evacuation of a military hospital and some planes in Danang.
WASHINGTON—The at mosphere in the Oval Room of the White House was de liberately casual and relaxed last Thursday as the photog raphers and reporters bustled briefly around President Nixon and his Soviet guests. They fell into easy ban ter.
The morale of the profes sional American fighting man has been shaken by the frustra tions of Vietnam, a wave of antimilitarism in the United States, race troubles, drugs and reverses and scandals in indi vidual services like the Sonmy affair.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 25—President Nguyen Van Thieu has ended a two day meeting with all of South Vietnam's major appointed of ficials, but there is no Indica tion that any major decisions were made at the gathering, the most comprehensive in re cent memory there.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 25 (UPI) —Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden said today that the Vietnam war was a civil war, not aggression by the north against the south, and the sooner the United States recog nized this, the sooner peace would come.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 25— President Nixon conferred at the White House today with six foreign heads of state and gov ernment then flew to his Camp David retreat in Maryland to rest overnight and prepare for another round of personal diplomacy here tomorrow.
QUANGNGAI, South Vietnam —One of the most wretched problems facing the Saigon Government is civilian war cas ualties—rehabilitation for the, hundreds of thousands who are maimed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 25—Highly placed sources said today that United States Special Forces troops leading clandestine operations in Laos had suffered casualties in re cent months that never had been made public.
To the Editor: Your highly partisan editorial of Oct. 16 in support of Dr. Harvey B. Scribner's refusal to testify in court on behalf of the existing examination procedures for school principals does little service to the cause of better school leadership selection that it hopes to promote.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26— President Nixon discussed Indochina, Communist China, the Middle East and Euro pean security for two hours today with President Nicolae Ceausescu of Rumania, who maintains cordial relations with all the sides in the con flicts. Mr. Ceausescu arrived by helicopter from Williams burg, Va., to a colorful recep tion on the White House lawn. The talks ran 30 min utes overtime, forcing a de lay in a luncheon for the Ru manian leader at the State Department. Mr. Nixon went out of his way to publicize President Ceausescu's two‐ day stay in Washington even though he had already been entertained at the White House on Saturday at a din ner for 31 chiefs of state and government who were in the United States for the 25th anniversary of the United Nations. Mr. Ceausescu was the only Communist head of state to attend the celebra tions, and the Nixon Admin istration, pleased with Ruma nia's independent foreign pol icies in the Communist world, displayed warm friendship for him. This afternoon Mr. Ceausescu met with Secretary of State William P. Rogers, George F. Shultz, director of the White House Office of Man agement and Budget, and Sec retary of Agriculture Clifford M. Hardin. Then President Ceausescu and his wife attend ed a White House dinner.
Ohio Wesleyan University has 80 athletes on its football roster. Last Friday, however, when the school began a two‐ week election recess, Coach Jack Fouts had to trim 27 members temporarily from the toorra.
The first court martial of a United States soldier on charges growing out of the alleged massacre of Viet namese civilians at Mylai thirty months ago, has been seriously compromised by the action of a House Armed Services subcommittee that investigated the Mylai incidents.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 26 (AP)—The Army command in Saigon has recommended that an American general be stripped of the nation's third highest award for valor in combat because it was based on a fabricated citation. Informed sources disclosed that Army headquarters here were awaiting approval from authorities in Washington, in cluding the Department of the Army, before taking action to withdraw a Silver Star from Brig. Gen. Eugene P. Forrester.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 26 (AP)—Led by two armored columns and supported by American artillery, 6,000 South Vietnamese troops were report ed to have pushed into the war ravaged Cambodian town of Snoul today in a new offensive.
STUTTGART, West Germany, Oct. 26—Sgt. James Earl Hob son, who was arrested 43 times as a youth in Chicago's black ghetto and who was later dec orated for heroism in Vietnam, went on trial before a general court‐martial today on charges of attempted murder and con spiracy.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26—A former Government specialist on Asia said today that allied intervention in Cambodia had made it “almost impossible” to negotiate a Vietnam settlement in Paris without enlarging the talks to deal with Cambodia and Laos as well. Chester L. Cooper, former aide to W. Averell Harriman and for two decades a Govern ment official said at a news conference that he believed that President Nixon's latest proposal for an Indochina con ference and an Indochina cease fire reflected recognition that the Paris talks were unlikely to make much progress as pres ently constituted.
STUTTGART, West Germany, Oct. 27—A United States Army prosecutor, opening his case against Sgt. James E. Hobson in a general court‐martial here, said today that he intended to show that the Vietnam battle field hero and one‐time Chicago delinquent had only aided and abetted others in a bloody grenade‐throwing incident.
LUXEMBOURG, Oct. 27— France is negotiating a five‐ year commercial treaty with North Vietnam. This was dis closed today in a communique after a meeting of the Council of Ministers of the European Economic Community, or Com mon Market.
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Oct. 27 (AP)—Specialist 4 Robert W. T'Souvas, one of 10 soldiers charged in the alleged massacre at Mylai 4, in South Vietnam, took the witness stand today at his pretrial hearing and said he did not remember whether he had shot two Vietnamese persons.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Oct. 28—First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. re turned to South Vietnam to day to gather evidence to de fend himself against charges that he had killed more than 100 South Vietnamese in the alleged massacre at Sonmy in 1968.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 27 (AP) — The comman der of a new South Vietnamese offensive in Cambodia said to day that his forces would push deeper into that country to try to force the North Viet namese to fight.
LOS ANGELES, Oct. 27 Student interest in politics has declined sharply since last spring, when hundreds of thou sands of young people demon strated against the incursion into Cambodia and the killings at Kent State.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 27 (AP)—The Army's Sai gon command is revoking two medals for bravery in combat that were awarded to Brig. Gen. Eugene P. Forrester on the basis of fictitious citations, an Army spokesman said tonight.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 27—A United States Marine Corps hel icopter flew President Nicolae Ceausescu of Rumania on this gray autumn afternoon from the White House to Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland, where he boarded a Soviet‐made airliner for the trip home.
Theodore W. Kheel, the labor negotiator, has con cluded as a result of recent talks with the various dele gations in Paris that the Viet nam war will not be settled in Paris.
SAIGON, South Vietnam. Thursday (Reuters) — South Vietnamese troops killed 44 guerrillas in a sharp clash near. Snoul in Cambodia, a military., spokesman said today.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 28—Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., accused of murdering at least) 102 South Vietnamese civilians, conferred with Army officials here today amid the secrecy of a crucial military operation.
LONDON, Oct. 28 (UPI)— Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko told British leaders today that “the time is not ripe” for an international peace conference on Viet nam, Government officials said.
ATLANTA, Oct. 28 — An Army Sergeant charged with murder at Mylai 4 has accused Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, the commander of United States Army troops in South Vietnam, of allowing prisoners to be beaten and tortured in his presence.
STOCKHOLM, Oct. 28—Unit ed States officials, seeking to strengthen their Government's shaky relations with Sweden, are convinced that the outpour ing of anti‐Americanism in recent years among students, radicals and politicians has steadily declined in the last few months.
Episcopal Bishops’ Stand
SONMY, South Vietnam, Oct 29—The Vietnamese of Sonmy say that 570 civilians were massacred here on March 16 1968, when an American infan try company entered the area, but none of them know the name of Lieut. William L. Cal ley Jr., nor what he looks like, nor do they understand why he was in Quangngai Province to day.
Most elections are decided by issues, candidate person ality and party loyalty. The findings of The New York Times / Yankelovich survey, conducted among a sample of 1.912 registered voters from all over the state, suggests this may be less applicable in the election for Governor and Senator.
Don't go away bored yet. The subject isn't quite dead. Chicago may have fallen on us last winter like a hail of cuckoo clocks and struck us dizzy; but the hour is past now and we may yet figure out what happened. Judging from this first trickle of serious books on the subject, there is still much to be said about the conspiracy trial of the Chicago Eight‐ Seven‐Nine (subtract Bobby Seale and add the defense lawyers William M. Kunstler and Leonard Weinglass). And I'm not in cluding Tom, Hayden's “Trial” (Holt, Rine hart & Winston, $4.95), which ought to be read, or Joseph Okpaku's “Verdict!: The Exclusive Picture Story of the Trial of the Chicago 8,” with drawings by Verna Sa dock (The Third Press, $7.95; paperbound, $3.95), which is so much poorly written scattershot. These two are partisan books and not what I have in mind at the mo ment.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 29—The 1968 murder conviction and sentence of a Green Beret cap tain involved in clandestine missions into Cambodia were set aside today by three judges of the Army Court of Military Review.
As one professionally interested in negotiation, I went to Paris to see if it looked like a negotiated settlement in Vietnam is possible.
LACKAWANNA, N. Y., Oct. 29 — Mayor Lindsay came here today to praise Arthur J. Gold berg but talked as if he came to bury the Nixon Administration.
SAN JOSE, Calif., Oct. 29— Demonstrators threw eggs, rocks, and placards at Presi dent Nixon's limousine tonight as he left the San Jose Muni cipal Auditorium following a political speech.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 29 (AP) — The United States command reported today that 43 Americans were killed in action in Indochina last week, three more than the week be fore.
PARIS, Oct. 29 — The Com munist delegations at the Viet nam Peace talks in Paris insist ed today that they had “buried deeply” Pres'dent Nixon's latest peace proposals and refused to comment on reports from Washington that they might still be interested.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 29—The United States charged the Soviet Union today with a “clear violation” of the consular convention between the two countries and called for the immediate release of the Unit ed States Army plane and passengers detained in Ar menia since they landed there eight days ago.
Item. The Prime Minister of Singa pore, Lee Kuan Yew, when passing through Cambridge recently, asked me why an advanced technology like America's should insist on producing low‐productivity textiles and common shoes. I touched a nerve of a New England radio audience when I quoted my answer. “We should move our resources to more efficient uses and turn over to the developing countries primitive activities that any emerging economy can do with low‐wage labor.” Item. The single question I am most asked when lecturing abroad is this: “Professor Samuelson, doesn't Amer ica's prosperity depend upon Cold War expenditures and imperialistic ven tures like that in Vietnam?”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct, 30—The South Vietnamese national press center has with drawn the press accreditation of the American journalist and former social worker who first publicized the “tiger‐cage” pris on cells on Con Son, an island 60 miles off South Vietnam.
DANANG, South Vietnam, Saturday, Oct. 31 (AP)—Offi cials estimated today that the heaviest floods in six years in three northern provinces of South Vietnam had left 50,000 people homeless.
PHOENIX, Oct. 30 — Sam Grossman, a newcomer to Ari zona, to the Democratic party and to politics, threatens to unseat Senator Paul J. Fannin with an aggressive television campaign financed mainly out of his own Docket.
SAIGON. South Vietnam, Oct. 30—The United States Com mand disclosed today a rise in deaths of soldiers from drug use in Vietnam and ascribed the increase to greater use of hard drugs and a more acces sible supply of “high potency heroin.”
SAIGON, South. Vietnam, Oct. 30—The Supreme Court today annulled the 10‐year sentence imposed on Representative Tran Ngoc Chau, the controversial Deputy jailed earlier this year.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 30 (UPI) The Army said today that Maj. Gen. Kenneth J. Hodson, the Judge Advocate General, would appoint an officer to de termine whether Capt. John J. McCarthy Jr. of the Special Forces will be retired for the 1967 murder of an alleged Vietnamese “double agent”
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 31—The American and British women of St. Christopher's Episcopal Church in Saigon held a charity rummage sale to day that quickly turned into a rout. Half of the goods—mostly clothing discarded by departing Americans—were stolen. 
Protesters in cities across the country staged generally peace ful demonstrations, parades and rallies against the Vietnam war yesterday, three days before the Tuesday elections. 
PARIS, Oct. 31 — Lacquered screens, straw mats, wicker baskets, specialty rice em broidery and a very high qual ity of hard coal are some of the products offered French consumers as a result of trade agreements with North Viet nam stretching back to 1955. 
TOKYO, Oct. 31 (UPI)—Com mu??st China and North Viet nam signed an agreement today covering living standards and working conditions for Chinese technicians working Vietnam, Hsinhua, the official China Press Agency, said in a broad cast monitored here
NEW DELHI, Oct. 31— India has been rebuffed again by North Vietnam in her at tempts to play an intermediary role in Vietnam peace negotia tions. 
WASHINGTON — At an afternoon rally before a sizable student crowd at the University of Tennessee, Sen ator Albert Gore recently declared that Vice President Agnew “is our worst disaster since Vietnam.” As one man, the students leaped to their feet, cheering and whistling; even Mr. Gore, one of the best stump orators in the country, appeared taken aback by the enthusiastic response to his remarks; and the uproar went on for well over a minute.
POSTMASTER GENERAL Winton M. Blount un veiled on Oct. 21 de signs of two 6‐cent stamps to be issued later this year honoring American serv icemen of past wars, and pay ing homage to men held as prisoners of war, or missing and killed in action in Viet nam. Both stamps will be printed on the same sheet. Mr. Blount has also an nounced issuance of a 6c stamp next year commem orating the 450th anniversary of the introduction of sheep to the North American conti nent.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Oct. 31 (Reuters)—Monsoon rains sweeping across the northern provinces of South Vietnam have resulted in an unofficial truce in the war as military forces concentrate on aid in stead of destruction. 
WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 (UPI) — The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee accused the Committee for a Responsi ble Congress today of using what it called “artfully con trived and deceitful” newspaper advertisements in an attempt to link some Democratic can didates with extreme and radi cal positions.
SAIGON, Oct. 31—President Nguyen Van Thieu declared to day that the Communists had no intention of negotiating a settlement of the Vietnam war unless they were assured of total domination of the country. 
A nationwide survey of 25,000 high school students has found that 43 per cent say they would volunteer for two years of mili tary service if the pay was in creased and the draft ended. 
SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 31 (UPI)—About 1,000 young peo ple marched to the city's Civic Center today to demonstrate their opposition to the war in Vietnam and President Nixon.
A long tedious campaign nears its climax. Through weeks of apathy, Republican candidates across the country — led first by Vice President Agnew, then by President Nixon himself — have sought to whip up emo tions about crime, campus disorders and pornography. A cynical, coolly calculated effort has been made to dis tract attention from the Administration's record in eco nomic affairs, and foreign policy — a deliberate effort to create scapegoats and then identify the Democrats with them.
Booze in his thermos, a garment bag slung over his shoulder, out of the morning strolls Paul Newman, itinerant radio announcer, to offer his services to WUSA, patriotic hate station broadcasting from New Orleans.To Newman comes Joanne Woodward, a wandering harlot with a heart of gold, a loving nature, a carved-up face, a certain vulnerability, and a fund of moral rectitude deep enough to float a generation of movie whores. And to them both comes Tony Perkins, shy social worker engaged among the black poor in a mysterious research project—which he learns too late is a fraud designed to discredit welfare, a fraud perpetrated by Pat Hingle, power-mad master of WUSA.Thus Stuart Rosenberg's "WUSA," which opened yesterday at the Penthouse and Plaza theaters, sets the stage for what it clearly intends as a major understanding of social forces at work in America—reactionary social forces, and in the South.If it were an ordinary bad movie (and it is a very bad movie), "WUSA" might, in spite of the distinguished names, and less distinguished presence, of its leading actors, be dismissed with no more than a nod to the tension between Rosenberg's ponderously emphatic direction, and Robert Stone's ponderously allusive screenplay. I suspect Stone wins out, for "WUSA" feels more like poor theater than poor moviemaking—so, that it continually suggests a failed version of "The Balcony," even though it strives to fall short of "The Manchurian Candidate."But at least in its ambitions, "WUSA" is not an ordinary bad movie. For in its climax, a huge white-power rally sponsored by WUSA, it means to hold a mirror up to middle America, to show the hate behind the innocence, the chaos implicit in the call to law and order.So, while Perkins stalks the auditorium catwalks with high-powered rifle, like the shade of Laurence Harvey (who is also in this movie, but in another role), Newman prepares to purge himself, to tell the country what it is like it is, when all hell breaks loose after the firing of the would-be assassin's bullet.In this sequence, during which Newman explains Vietnam to a panic-ridden, rioting mass of the thin-lipped pinch-faced silent majority, "WUSA" has its crucial image, and, presumably, its rational. But in this sequence it displays most brazenly the utter gratuitousness of all its images, the bad faith that informs its self-righteous view of Southern demagoguery, the poverty not of mainstream America but of its own ideas about mainstream America.Despite its obsession with collecting evidence, and its handy school of pseudo-documentary, "WUSA" fights unreal battles with an unseen enemy. Lacking either the grace of art of the vitality of guerrilla theater, it can offer only the coarsest nourishment—and only to the elaborately self-deceived.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 1 (Reuters)—Lieut. Gen. Fred erick Weyand today received fourth star to make him a full general and at the same time became deputy commander of United States forces in Viet nam.
NEW HAVEN, Nov. 1— When a massive antiwar demonstration was proposed recently for the Town Green here this weekend, many peo ple at Yale fretted that it might hurt local peace can didates because voters were getting weary of all demon strations. There were other misgivings, too.
NEW CASTLE, Pa., Nov. 1 (AP)—A black Vietnam veteran was shot to death in front of a tavern early today and the resulting disorders brought in jury to nine persons, including five policemen, the police said. According to the police, more than 100 persons poured onto streets from taverns on the city's south side and began smashing windows after Ronald Mitchell, 21, was shot in the stomach from a passing vehicle. The police said they had no sus pects in the shooting.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 2 (AP)—Vietcong gunners were reported to have shelled Saigon early today for the first time in three months, and authorities reported six Vietnamese were killed and 15 wounded and a cluster of hous es was destroyed.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Mon day, Nov. 2—Maj. Gen. Duong Van Minh, one of the most pop ular figures in South Vietnam, broke a year‐long political si lence yesterday with a broad hint that he would challenge Nguyen Van Thieu for the pres idency next year.
•
On Oct. 7th the President an nounced an Indo‐China peace initiative as a serious effort to lay the basis for a settlement of the conflict. This comprehensive program containing a number of features new to the U.S. negotiating position has the agree ment and support of the governments of South Vietnam, Laos and Cam bodia.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 1—Cambodia declared herself a republic last month, but she has not decided what kind of a republic she wants to be.
QUANGNGAI, South Viet nam, Nov. 2 (AP)—Smiling and giving the peace sign, First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. today flew in a helicop ter over the, area involved in the accusation that he mur dered more than 100 Vietna mese villagers two and a half years ago.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 2—Nearly two thousand Roman Catholics gathered in the rain today around the un marked grave of Ngo Dinh Diem while the city around them took a Government holi day to celebrate President Diem's overthrow and assas sination seven years ago. 
PARIS, Nov. 2—Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh, chief negotiator for the Vietcong at the Vietnam peace talks here, indicated to day that her side might be pre pared to deal with a South Viet namese government headed by Gen. Duong Van Minh.
Nixon's Stand on Smut
WASHINGTON, Nov. 2 (AP) —United States casualties in Vietnam hit a five‐year low last week, the Pentagon announced today, although the exaact fig ures were not given. 
LONDON, Nov. 2 — World military expenditures leveled off last year but nuclear stock piles were vast enough to blast every person in the world with the equivalent of 15 tons of TNT, a wide‐ranging survey of armament and disarmament said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tuesday, Nov. 3—The United States command has doubled the leave time available to sol diers serving in Vietnam to en able them to hitch a free ride back to the United States for a two‐week visit. 
HOUSTON, Nov. 2—Represen tatives of a coalition of 12 lib eral and radical groups, most of them antiwar, accused the Houston Police Department to day of protecting two “night rider” members of the Ku Klux Klan who allegedly committed vandalism. 
A new kind of Gallup Poll shows a majority in favor of withdrawing all American troops from Vietnam by the end of next year and a major ity in favor of wage and price controls. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Wednesday, Nov. 4 (AP)—A Cambodian military spokes man said today that elements of a North Vietnamese division had moved into flooded areas just across the Mekong River from Pnompenh with the ap parent mission of battering the capital's defenses. 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Nov. 3—A North Vietnamese statement accusing the United States forces of a general pol icy of civilian massacres in South Vietnam has been circu lated here to all members at the request of the Hungarian Government. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 3 (AP)—Final arguments on mo tions and selection of a court martial panel to try Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. on charges stemming from the alleged massacre at Mylai, have been postponed to Nov. 10. Lieuten ant Calley is charged with the slaying of 102 Vietnamese civil ians. 
CHULAI, South Vietnam, Nov. 3 (AP)—First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. completed an evidence‐gathering mission today in the Sonmy area. He is facing trial on charges that he killed more than 100 Vietnamese villagers there more than two years ago. 
DANANG, South Vietnam, Nov. 3 (UPI) — Last week's floods, the worst in six years, left at least 193 persons dead and more than 204,000 homeless in the five north ern provinces, South Viet namese military, authorities reported today. 
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Nov. 3 (AP)—The officer who conducted the Army's equiva lent of a civilian grand jury investigation in one of the 10 Mylai cases denied today that publicity surrounding the al leged massacre of Vietnamese civilians had influenced his de cision to recommend that the case be tried by court‐martial. 
CHOTHOM, South Vietnam, Nov. 1—All through the nine teen‐sixties this hamlet and much of the surrounding coun tryside in the Mekong Delta belonged to the Vietcong. For a year it has been held by the South Vietnamese Government, and the countryside appears to be secure. 

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 3 (UPI)—Pesident Ngu yen Van Thieu of South Viet nam indicated tonight for the first time that he might not seek a second term in elections scheduled for September, 1971. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 4 — A young marine sergeant from West Babylon, L.I., who de clared he was a defector in Sweden last August before re turning to the United States, was charged by the Marine Corps today with desertion, abandoning arms and aiding the enemy. 
MOSCOW, Nov. 4—The So viet Union today repeated its opposition to President Nixon's Indochina peace proposals and reiterated its support for the proposals of the Vietnamese Communists. 

SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 4 (Reuters)—The South Vietnamese Air Force took over an air base in the Mekong Delta today from the United States. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 5 — The United States command reported today that 24 American soldiers were killed in combat in Indochina last week, the lowest weekly toll in five years.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 5 (AP)—The death toll from floods that swept South Vietnam's five northern prov inces last weekend reached 237 today.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 5 (AP) A top‐level military review board has blamed the Johnson Administration for some of the mistakes of the Vietnam war, asserting that long‐range con tingency plans were ignored by not calling up the reserves and by planning for a short war.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 5—The United States Secretary of the Air Force, Robert C. Seamans Jr., reported today that the North Vietnamese had carried out an extensive build up of supplies in their southern provinces.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 5—A prolonged period of diplomatic exploration is foreseen by Unit ed States officials before ac tual negotiations on a Vietnam peace settlement are likely to get under way. These could in clude secret talks in Paris and contacts elsewhere through friendly governments, the offi cials said.
PARIS, Nov. 5—Measuring the prog ress of Vietnamese peace negotia tions is something like measuring the speed of a glacier. In neither case is there detectable movement and yet, if one looks back over a period of time, it is possible to discern change with respect to fixed landmarks.
WASHINGTON, Nov, 5 (AP) —A member of the team that helped recover the Apollo 13 astronauts when they splashed down from their troubled flight to the moon has been killed by a land mine in Vietnam,
PARIS, Nov. 5— American and Communist negotiators at the Vietnam peace talks here charged each other with dis courtesy today as the confer ence settled back into a fa miliar routine, of non‐negotia tion.
This is a period of deep concern over the social re sponsibility of corporations. Many commentators are be ginning to ask whether the corporation has the right to carve out profits at the ex pense of the ecology of the land—or even at the expense of human lives.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 6 (AP)—Two, replacements have been named to the 10‐member court‐martial board that will try Army Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. on murder charges in the death of 102 Vietnamese civil ians at Sonmy.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 6 (AP)—A Cambodian military spokesman reported today that about 200. North Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers am bushed Cambodian troops west of the Angkor temples in northwest Cambodia, starting an eight–hour battle. The spokesman said casualty fig ures were not available, but field reports indicated they might be high.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 6 (AP) — Six thousand South Vietnamese troops ad vanced across a 100‐mile‐wide front in southeastern Cambodia today in a major new opera tion.
London, Nov. 6—When it is all over, some day, what shall we have learned from the war in Vietnam? What will it have told us about America and the world, about the use of power, about the relationship between polit ical ends and military means?
WASHINGTON— Americans — well intentioned, liberal‐minded Americans especially have an almost ungovern able urge to play the, role of Miss Fix‐It. If things go wrong, Miss Fix‐It, American liberal model, just has to move and fix everything up right.
When confronted with a grave crime a classical, basic question immediately poses itself: who profits from it? For any war the same question also arises: to whose advantage is this war being fought? This is also the proper way to look at Vietnam with its military stale mate. The purpose of that war is, we are told, to contain communism and to guarantee a freely elected govern ment in order to honor American com mitments. But what is happening in reality? The gain is entirely on the Communist side.
The President's new Vietnam pro posals have once again raised the hopes of a negotiated settlement. How ever, although his five‐point plan is eminently fair it is unlikely to be ac cepted in Hanoi.
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Nov. 6—The United States called here today for United Nations action to press North Vietnam to allow identification of war prisoners and to allow access to them by the Red Cross.
SOCTRANG, South Vietnam, Nov. 5—The transfer of the United States Army helicopter base here to the South Vietna mese Air Force yesterday ap peared as effortless as the cer emonial hauling down of the Stars and Stripes.
MAJORCA — Consciousness has a strange way with conscience: more often than not, it is a kind of un peaceful coexistence. Each has a tendency to avoid looking at each other. What we are witnessing today in the U.S.A., largely as a consequence of Vietnam, is a fusion between conscience and consciousness, and it is difficult to see how this could fail to lead the country toward a meta morphosis, or at least to a change.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman, who was arrested last May on charges that he disrupted serv ices at Temple Emanu‐E1 while seeking contributions for black militants, lost in a move yes terday to disqualify District At torney Frank S. Hogan from prosecuting him. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 7 (AP)—Cheng Heng, the Cam bodian Chief of State, said to day that President Nixon had personally promised him a big ger military and economic aid package to underwrite Cambo dia's war against the North Vietnamese and Vietcong. But he said the size of the figure was still being discussed. 
America in Vietnam. By Chester L. Cooper. Foreword by Ambassador W. Averell Harriman. 559 pp. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. $12.
ABOARD U.S.S. SHANGRI LA, off North Vietnam, Nov??2 (AP) — So many American planes are bombing the Ho Chi Minh trail in southern Laos that military officials have es tablished traffic patterns simi lar to those in use at major American airports. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 7—Five months ago Nguyen Bang, who had lost both leg?? while fighting for the Green Berets, drank an overdose of medicine in an effort to kill himself. His mother found him and carried him to the hospital. 
Of all the silly and self‐serving in terpretations of the 1970 election, the prize goes to the propagandists in the North Vietnamese capital of Hanoi. They are telling the world that Presi dent Nixon has been rebuked, and re pudiated by the American people, and this is not only wrong but dangerous. 
There were no victory pa rades, no brass bands, no cheering crowds when Wendell Sissler came marching home from Vietnam. 
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov 7 (AP)—Two grenades exploded in a movie theater here tonight and the police reported 18 per sons killed and 46 wounded. 
VILLANOVA, Pa., Nov. 7 (UPI) — Three Villanova Uni versity students have sounded a call on 500 college campuses for a drive to send a Christmas card or greeting to each of the 344,000 American servicemen in Vietnam. The three are Rob ert J. Breslin Jr. of Manhasset, L. I.; Thomas Creagh, also of Manhasset, and Tom Treacy of Plainview, L. I. 
LOS ??ANGELES, Nov. 7—Last spring, in the emotional back wash of Cambodia and Kent State, many students vowed to work for a “new Congress” that would end the war and reorder national priorities. 

The stalemate in the Paris talks, President Thieu's cocktail banter about stepping down and a call for peace and “national reconciliation” by his leading rival, General “Big” Minh, are stirring new interest in South Vietnam's impending presidential campaign. There is speculation in Paris and Saigon that Mr. Thieu's with drawal or his defeat in the election might open the way to negotiation for a political settlement between the Com munists and a new Saigon Government.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 8 (AP) —Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson said today that her husband was receiving White House briefings every Friday on world events.
SAIGON, Nov. (Reuters)— Three United States soldiers were killed and three wounded today when one apparently stepped on an unexploded ar tillery round. The incident oc rcurred about 350 miles north east of Saigon.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Nov. 9 —President Nixon intends to nominate a Southern conserva tive to the Supreme Court at the first available opportunity, and apparently believes that the new Senate would approve such a choice.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 9—The Supreme Court refused today to hear the challenge by the State of Massachusetts to the constitutionality of the Vietnam war.
To the Editor:
Robert Brill is a lawyer, as were his father and his grandfather before him, in Rosetta, Ill. (pop. 32,800). He owns a farm, where he raises food for his own table. He hunts and fishes for the same pur pose. He has a wife, who loves the sherry bottle more than life, and two children —a girl in high school and a boy who sought first to evade the draft by decamping to Montreal and then went to Vietnam and became a pro fessional soldier. Brill does his own share of drinking, with vodka in stead of coffee for breakfast, a can of beer be tween his knees while he's driving, a bottle in the back seat and a bottle in the office desk. Brill drinks because he is in ?? constant state of rage: “There is only one way to react in a stupid‐ass proceeding, and that is, every time they hit you, smash back at them insanely. You don't do this because your legal grounds are any good. It's how things work. If you can make it painful enough for them this time, maybe they'll go hit some other poor jerk next time.”
FORT McPHERSON, Ga., Nov. 9 (AP)—Charges against Capt. Ernest L. Medina in the al leged massacre at Sonmy more than two years ago have been returned to a military investi gating officer for further study, the Army announced today.
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 9 (Reuters)—North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops were re ported have launched coor dinated attacks today against Government military positions and towns northeast of Pnom penh.
SAIGON?? South Vietnam?? Nov. 8—According to informed sources, Cambodian officers are discussing with members of the entourage of Prince Boun O??m, the feudal chief of southern Laos, the possibility of sending sizable numbers of Cambodian troops to Laos to be equipped with United States arms.
PARIS, Nov. 10 (Reuters) —All four delegations to the Vietnam peace talks here have agreed to postpone this week's session because of the death of Chares de Gaulle, a spokesman for the Vietcong delegation said today. 
EVREUX, France, Nov. 10— In 1356, according to the guide books, John the Good seized Evreux from Charles the Bad. Then he burned it. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 10 — Automobile traffic near the villa on Hongthaptu Street has picked up lately. Ambassadors, politicians, re tired generals and various reli gious figures have been arriv ing with increasing regularity these days to chat with Gen. Duong Van Minh, the man most likely to challenge President Nguyen Van Thieu in the elec tions next year. 
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla., Nov. 10—President Nixon will at tend memorial services for Charles de Gaulle, the White House announced today. Mr. Nixon will leave Washington tomorrow morning with a small official delegation, attend the service at Notre Dame Cathe dral in Paris on Thursday, and return to Washington late Thursday night.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 10—The military judge in the murder trial of First Lieut. Wil liam. L. Calley Jr. opened the way today for testimony by key, prosecution witnesses who were barred from taking the stand at the trial of another defendant in the alleged mas sacre of South Vietnamese civilians at Mylai. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 (UPI) —Arnold S. Johnson, public re lations director of the Commu nist party of the United States, was indicted by a Federal grand jury today for contempt of Con gress. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 (AP) —State Departmentofficials said today that Vice President Ngu yen Cao Ky of South Vietnam would visit the United States next week: For security rea sons, the time and place of his arrival were not disclosed. 
SYDNEY, Australia, Nov. 10— Antiwar demonstrators draped a Vietcong flag across the shoulders of Prime Minister John G. Gorton at an election rally in Perth today. The flag was immediately snatched away by one of Mr. Gorton's aides. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 (Reuters) — The Government will extend its combat‐zone tax benefits to military per sonnel serving in certain Southeast Asian posts outside Vietnam, the Treasury De partment announced here to day. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 (AP) —Postmaster General Winton M. Blount is in Paris on the first leg of a journey that might take him to Hanoi to assure that Christmas mail gets to Americans held prisoner in North Vietnam, Government sources reported today. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 The election has left the Gov ernment with a sizable hang over. There is work to be done, in all three branches, but there are already signs that the next campaign will merge imper ceptibly into the last and leave the politicians reeling for quite a while. Even now, the per‐ formance or me economy, the war in Vietnam, the re form of the wel fare system, the effort to combat crime and the integration of schools are being measured for their effects on the race for President two years hence. In both parties, the thought is taking hold that the economy looms largest in this catalogue and that everything from the budget to the lowliest appro priation bills will therefore be subject to unusual partisan maneuvers. News Analysis
TOKYO, Nov. 10—A 26‐year old American Quaker woman, whose ancestors arrived in Pennsylvania with William Penn, sits in a narrow hotel room at Tokyo International Airport fighting deportation, while at a United States Marine Corps stockade in Iwakuni, southern Japan, a I9‐year‐old Vietnam war veteran prepares his defense against charges of desertion and riot. 
More than 200 antiwar stu dents yesterday disrupted a “Salute to Our Veterans” cere mony sponsored by a conserva tive student group at Hunter College.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 11 (AP) —The Nixon Administration asked the Supreme Court today to rule out draft exemptions for men who are conscien tiously opposed to the Vietnam ese war but not to all wars.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 11—Nguyen Dang Thuc, One of Vietnam's leading thinkers, be lieves that Americans should play a significant role in post war Vietnam
PNOMPENH, Cambodia, Nov. 11 (AP) — Two battalions of Cambodian troops were am bushed today 35 miles north of Pnompenh on Highway 7. The scene was about five miles east of the district capital of Skoun. There were no reports on cas ualties. Two companies were sent to reinforce the ambushed units, officers at Skoun said.
An organization of service academy alumni called on President Nixon yesterday to “put aside self‐serving political goals” and promptly withdraw all troops from Vietnam.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Nov. 11 (UPI)—The prosecutor in the case of S. Sgt. David Mitchell, charged with assault with in tent to murder in the alleged Mylai massacre of civilians in South Vietnam, says he plans no changes in his case despite a ruling in a similar case in Georgia.
GENEVA, Nov. 12—Post master General Winton M. Blount today requested the help of the International Committee or the Red Cross in getting Christmas mail to American prisoners of war in North Viet nam. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 12—Two probable themes in the defense of First Lieut. Wil liam L. Calley Jr. emerged to day when his court‐martial for the premeditated murder of 102 South Vietnamese civilians of ficially opened more than two and a half years after the al leged massacre at Sonmv. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Fri day, Nov. 13 (AP)—The United States command reported yes terday that on Tuesday and Wednesday American forces in Indochina had gone through two days without a combat fatality for the first time in five years. 
ROME, Nov. 12—The Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko, had an unusually long audience with Pope Paul VI in the Vatican this afternoon after three days of talks with Italian Government leaders. 
PARIS, Nov. 12 — President Nixon chatted briefly and in formally late this afternoon with Nikolai V. Podgorny, the Soviet President. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 13—Attempts to complete a military jury, for the murder trial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. failed again today after extensive questioning of a panel of Army officers, 
Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam is to arrive in New York tomorrow after noon for a two‐and‐a‐half‐week visit to the United States, the spokesman for Saigon's observer mission at the United Nations said yeaterday.
North Vietnam has informed an American peace group that six United States servicemen it held prisoner have died. Hanoi also confirmed the iden tities of four additional Ameri can prisoners. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13 (UPI) —Many American servicemen whose terms of service are just about up will be given a Christmas bonus in the form of a discharge up to two weeks earlier so they can shed their uniforms before the holidays, the Pentagon said today. 
CHICAGO, Nov. 13 — The United States Court of Appeals ordered Judge Julius J. Hoff man today to hold a hearing as soon as possible to determine the nature of any communica tions between the judge or Fed eral marshals and the jury in the Chicago conspiracy trial. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 13— Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird warned North Vietnam today that the United States stood ready to retaliate against any continued firing at Ameri can reconnaissance aircraft. 
Painless Taxes
BASICALLY most adults are suspi cious of those who write for chil dren. At least in the years I have been writing children's books and plays, I have found this to be so. There seems to be the unspoken assumption that it is obviously an inadequacy on my part which might improve with ex perience, if not age. Of course, it hasn't. Although I have been a foreign corres pondent in both Korea and Vietnam, and have had adult plays produced in summer stock, I still continue quite con tentedly writing for young people. And I suppose it is because I feel, as C. S. Lewis did, that it is the best form for what I have to say about the things that really matter to me.
STOCKHOLM, Nov. 14 (Rue ters) — The Swedish Cabinet has turned down a final ap peal from an American military deserter who is scheduled to be deported next week — the first United States deserter to be sent home from Sweden. 
SYDNEY, Australia, Nov. 14 —Campaigning for the Senate elections next Saturday has de veloped into an acrimonious contest between Prime Minister John G. Gorton and Edward Gough Whitlam, head of the opposition Labor party. 

WASHINGTON, Nov. 14 (AP) —The Army has announced a reshuffling of major units growing out of the reduction of United States forces in Viet nam and a parallel cutback in over‐all American arms strength. 
To the Editor:
Although the Vietnam casual ties have been at their lowest point in five years these past few weeks, it would be tragic if the public were lulled into apathy. An enormous problem still exists: 300,000 total cas ualties, 100,000 seriously wounded, 5,000 severe injuries of the upper extremities. 
IWAKUNI, Japan, Nov. 13— A shy 19‐year‐old Marine pri vate on trial in a drab Quonset hut here has become the latest symbol of confrontation be tween antiwar partisans—both American and Japanese—and the United States military establishment. 
PARIS, Nov. 14—The North Vietnamese delegation to the peace talks denied today that there was an understanding with the United States concern ing unarmed reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 14 —The selection of a military jury to try First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. for his role in the alleged Mylai massacre stalled again today after the fourth juror was chosen. 
The An Lac Orphanage in Saigon, Vietnam, will receive 50 per cent of the proceeds of a sale of the brush paint ings of Mon‐ying Chow next Saturday at the China Insti tute at 125 East 65th Street. The sale will be held from 1 to 5 P.M. Mrs. Chow, who came here from Hong Kong for the exhibition, will dem onstrate her art at 3 P.M.
To the Editor:
PARIS — The greatest lesson of the Vietnam war is that America still has many commitments abroad and still retains foreign policy aims that can no longer be maintained by the kind of military establishment, strategy or net work of alliances now employed. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 14 (UPI) —Postmaster General Winton M. Blount, back from Paris where he attempted to arrange delivery of mail to American prisoners in North Vietnam, says he will await word from the Government in Hanoi be fore taking further steps. 
Raffaele Minichiello is a cor poral in the Marine Corps and a veteran of the war in Vietnam. Last November, Minichiello, fac ing a court‐martial for burglary and contending that he had been treated unfairly by the Marines, decided to return to his native Italy — the hard way.
HONG KONG, NOV. 14—A new agreement on economic cooperation was signed in Pe king today between Pakistan and Communist China. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 14 (UPI)—The cost of liv ing in Saigon rose 2.8 per cent last week, according to a re port made public by the United States Embassy. 
South Vietnam's Vice Presi dent, Nguyen Cao Ky, slipped uneventfully into New York last night under heavy security guard to begin an unofficial two‐and‐a‐half‐week visit to the United States. 
Preferential Voting Backed
Charles de Gaulle's influence on the life of France over the past three decades has dominated the obituaries, but the consequences of his departure may also prove profound. 

WASHINGTON, Nov. 15 — The Special Forces, the United States Army's specialists in guerrilla warfare and military intelligence operations, are fac ing a major cutback in their strength as a result of a basic change of emphasis on what their primary mission should be. 


The New York Chapter of the Marine Corps Combat Cor respondents Association has elected Charles J. Gilroy Jr. as its new president. Mr. Gilroy, who served as information offi cer for the Vietnam headquar ters of Gen. Creighton Abrams before retiring from active duty, is special assistant to the man ager of the William J. Burns International Detective Agency.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Tues day, Nov. 17 (Reuters)—The big Bienhoa air base was struck by more than a dozen rockets this morning, apparently fired by Vietcong guerrillas. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 16 (AP) —President and Mrs. Nixon will give a Thanksgiving Day dinner at the White House for about 100 Vietnam war veterans in Washington area hospitals. The White House announce ment today said the hospitals would select the patients to at tend. Last Thanksgiving—their first in the White House — the Nixons gave a similar dinner for residents of Washington‐ area homes for the elderly. 
BELOIT, Wis., Nov. 16 (AP)— Merton D. Perry, who reported the war from Vietnam as bu reau manager for United Press International and then as cor respondent for Newsweek maga zine, died of a heart attack yes terday morning in the Beloit Hospital. His age was 41. 
FORT HOOD, Tex., Nov. 16 —The court‐martial of Staff Sgt. David Mitchell resumed here today after a 26‐day post ponement only to become en snarled in another delay that forestalled testimony of de fense witnesses for at least one more day. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 16 (AP) —Returning Vietnam war vet erans are having an increas ingly tough time finding jobs despite special Government help, and the situation is likely to grow worse as the United States reduces its war role, the Labor Department said today. 
Nov. 16, 1970
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 16—A six‐man military jury for the murder trial of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. was com pleted today. 
BANGKOK, Thailand, Wednes day, Nov. 18 (AP)—Thailand will withdraw all its 12,000 troops from South Vietnam by 1972, the Premier, Thanom Kit tikachorn, said today. 

WASHINGTON, Nov. 17 — A Navy narcotics investigator told a House Armed Services sub committee today that a major concern of the Navy was “the alarming increase in LSD use in the naval service.” 
NUREMBERG AND VIETNAM: An American Tragedy. By Telford Taylor. 224 pages. A New York Times Book: Quadrangle. $5.95. Paperbound, $1.95. 
AT THE DEMILITARIZED ZONE, South Korea, Nov. 17— Life is dreary in late fall in the bleak hills where American and North Korean troops face each other without seeing each other and when there is only the icy Manchurian winter to look for ward to. 
Common Market vs. World Market
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Wednesday, Nov. 18 (Reuters) —South Vietnamese forces con tinued their push into north‐ east Cambodia today after re porting the discovery of big food and equipment dumps. 
FORT HOOD, Tex., Nov. 17 —Three former members of the infantry company that en tered the hamlet of Mylai No. 4 more than two years ago said today that they had seen Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. shoot into a group of South Vietnamese civilians. But they said they had not seen S. Sgt. David Mitchell near the ditch where the shooting occurred. 
 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 17 (Reu ters) — Representative Robert Price, Republican of Texas, an nounced today that he planned to meet a North Vietnamese of ficial in Paris next week and was optimistic about getting in formation on American prison ers. He met the official, Nguyen Minh Vy, on Sept. 11. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 18 — President Nixon asked Congress today for a sixfold increase in economic and military assist ance for the Cambodian Gov ernment as part of an over‐all supplemental request for $1.03‐ billion more in foreign aid funds for the present fiscal year. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 19 (AP)—A hand grenade exploded in a crowd watching a movie 20 miles northeast of Saigon last night, killing nine civilians and wounded 43 other persons, south Vietnamese military headquarters reported today. 
FORT HOOD, Tex., Nov. 18— A sworn statement that ac cused First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. of ordering and then helping to carry out the killing of at least 100 South Viet namese civilians was read into the record today at the court‐ martial of S. Sgt. David Mitchell. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 18—A former Army combat photographer testified today that he had seen American sol diers slay unarmed Vietnamese civilians in four separate in cidents in the alleged massacre at Mylai. 
LEAVENWORTH, Kan., Nov. 18 (AP)—Vice President Ngu yen Cao Ky of South Vietnam exchanged warm greetings with 11 South Vietnamese at tending the Army Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth today. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 18 — Gen. Lewis W. Walt, the assist ant commandant of the Ma ri?c Corps, today pondered the lessons of the Vietnam war, the things to bear in mind “if we were to go into this kind of war again.” 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 18 — North Vietnam is sending near ly twice as many troops southward along infiltration routes in the early weeks of the dry season this year as it did in 1969, senior United States officials said today. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 19 — The awarding of medals to United States ser vicemen has come under review here and in Washington to de termine how much represents accomplishment and how much has been allowed to lapse into procedure and public relations.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 19 (AP] —A large influx of highly po tent, cheap heroin in Vietnam has increased the drug‐related death rate of soldiers there, an Army official told Congress today.
CHICAGO, Nov. 19—The con spiracy case of the Chicago Seven was returned to open court today as Judge Julius J. Hoffman began a hearing to determine whether he or any of the Federal marshals at the trial had improper communica tions with the jurors while they were deliberating.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 19 —Pan American World Airways and the United Service Club, a nonprofit organization that charters flights for military personnel, disclosed today that low‐cost flights for soldiers coming home on leave from South Vietnam would begin shortly.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 19 (AP)—A United States Marine helicopter returning from a rescue mission crashed into a mountain yesterday, kill ing 15 marines, including the members of a patrol that had called for the rescue.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 19 —The Senate Foreign Relations Committee agreed today to hold hearings on the Nixon Administration's request for $1‐billion in additional military aid. A major debate appeared to be building up over $155 million for Cambodia that was included in the request.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 19 — A witness testified to day that Capt. Ernest Medina shot a prostrate Vietnamese woman during the alleged Mylai massacre.
To the Editor: The removal of Dr. Arnold Einhorn, Chief of Pediatrics at Lincoln Hospital for the past twelve years, from his post is deplorable.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 19 —Following is a list of awards and decorations from all services issued for heroism in World War 11, Korea, and Vietnam. The figures given for Vietnam are current to Oct. 1.
PARIS, Nov. 19—North Viet nam warned the United States today that it would continue to oppose reconnaissance flights over its territory and the Unit ed States made it clear that it had no intention of abandon ing such flights.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Nov. 19 —With his eves brimming with tears, S. Sgt. David Mitchell took the witness stand in his own defense today and testi fied that he had not seen Amer ican troops kill any civilians in the South Vietnamese hamlet of Mylai 4.
FORT RUCKER, Ala., Nov. 18 — Among men who had one of the most dangerous jobs in Vietnam — piloting helicopters — there are gripes and dis gruntlement about how the Army awards its medals.
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 20 —A ditch piled with the bodies of Vietnamese men, women and children became a casual target for two American soldiers in the allegea Mylai massacre, Government witness testified today at the court‐martial of First Lieec. William L. Calley Jr.
It was in April, 1968, that I first heard a Vietnam veteran describe seek‐and‐destroy mission as “seek‐and avoid.” He said that most of the men in his company, an infantry unit sta tioned near Danang, didn't think the war seemed “worth it” in terms of life, limb and disrupted youth. “On patrol,” lie explained “we were sup posed to go a mile and engage Charlie, right? What we did was go a hundred yards, find us some heavy foliage, smoke, rap and sack out.”
HONG KONG, Saturday, Nov. 21—The Hanoi radio reported that “wave after wave” of United States bombers attacked targets in North Vietnam early today, including a prisoner of war camp where the station said there had been “a number of United States prisoner of war casualties.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 20 —Secretary of. Defense Melvih R. Laird cautioned today that a Congressional refusal to pro vide $155 ‐million in military aid for Cambodia could slow American troop withdrawals from South Vietnam.
In June of 1969 at Guam President Nixon announced the plan for reduc tions in military strength and a phased withdrawal of American armed forces from South Vietnam. America, twenty five years after the glories and vic tories of World War II, is now under taking a limited withdrawal from its aggressive policies of involvement and intervention in the affairs of nations undergoing social and political change which are not of direct concern to the security and welfare of the United States.
The ultimate question of “guilt” in the trials of the Son My troops is how far what they did departed from gen eral American military practice in Vietnam as they had witnessed it. This may not be germane to the ques tion of legality under the Geneva Con ventions or the Articles of War. But the defense of superior orders has its true base not in technicality but in equity. It is properly invoked by the low‐ranking soldier in mitigation of punishment for conduct, even though unlawful, that is not too far removed from the behavior authorized or en couraged by his superiors.
FORT HOOD, Tex., Nov. 20 —S. Sgt. David Mitchell, the first soldier to face court‐mar tial on charges stemming from the alleged slaughter of South Vietnamese civilians at the hamlet of Mylai 4, was ac quitted tonight by a seven member panel of officers.
Hanoi Radio reported that “wave after wave” of United States fighter bombers at tacked targets in North Vietnam early to day, including a prisoner of war camp. The station said at least three jet bombers and one helicopter had been shot down. In Washington, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird confirmed the raids in a statement. He said the bombers had struck south of the 19th parallel, in response to “attacks on our unarmed reconnaissance aircraft.” [Page 1,
LONDON, Nov. 20—One of the great functions of the Supreme Court is to make America face basic moral and institutional problems that, long avoided, have caused fissures in the society. The Warren Court did so, notably, in its bold decisions on race and legislative apportionment.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 20 (AP)—Army officials admit ted today that two dogs were awarded Bronze Star Medals in South Vietnam last month.
CHICAGO, Nov. 20 — Mrs. Kay Richards Stevens, the young woman juror who be came the self‐appointed ne gotiator in the deliberations of the jury in the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial, testified today that the jury notified Judge Ju lius J. Hoffman on two occa sions that it was unable to reach a verdict.
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21—Senator Edmund S. Muskie, Democrat of Maine, deplored tonight “renewed reliance on military pressure” that he said was evident in the bombings) of North Vietnam.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 21—A deserter from the South Vietnamese Army has been hiding in his family's crowded house in a Saigon suburb for more than two and a half years, loathing what his life has become.
PARIS, Nov. 21—The North Vietnamese reacted today to the American bombing of their territory with a hint that they might boycott the peace talks here.
POIPET, Cambodia, Nov. 15 —Vietnamese refugees at a detention center here com plain of a lack of food and say Cambodian guards attack their women.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 21—A sign of the appar ent emotional exhaustion and weariness felt by many South Vietnamese and United States soldiers is the lack of interest in the trials of Americans ac cused in the alleged massacre at the hamlet of ?? 4.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Nov. 22 (AP)—Amer ican vessels sank a trawler presumed to have been North Vietnamese, in a battle on the South China Sea as the trawl er attempted to infiltrate South Vietnam, the Navy an nounced today.
QUANG NGAI, South Viet nam, Nov. 21 (AP)—Allied mili tary officials plan to reward civilians who report mines and booby traps along South Viet nam's north‐central coast in Quang Ngai Province, a strong hold of the Vietcong.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 21 (AP)—Several offi cers of the America] Division knew that the Pentagon had prohibited the use of a chem ical defoliant when their troops used it last summer, the United States command said today.
PRINCETON, N. J., Nov. 21—Some students and faculty members at Princeton Universi ty are opposing a survey con taining information about a demonstration last May against the Institute for Defense Anal yses, a Defense Department re search facility here.
WASHINGTON—The President and his staff turned their ener gies last week to the business of government and away from the exigencies of partisan politics, which have preoccupied them for so long. The change brought an odd sense of quiet and order —and even reconciliation—to the White House; but the effects were felt in Congress, the Cabi net and beyond.
OKMULGEE, Okla., Nov. 19 —Only 20 per cent of Ameri can youths today graduate from college with a four‐year degree or better. Bill Risner, a wiry, 24‐year‐old Vietnam veteran with short brown hair, a shy manner and a Marine Corps bulldog tattooed on his right arm, is one of the other 80 per cent.
Twenty‐six demonstrators were arrested yesterday after noon when they crossed police barricades in zn act of civil disobedience following a rally against genocide.”
BUFFALO, Nov. 21—They chanted “Om” for the love of Allen. They watched films of the American bombings in North Vietnam. While babies and leashless dogs scampered in and out of a packed room, they were exhorted to avoid “radical theatrical funk” be cause “wearing a beret doesn't make you Ohe Guevara.”
Two months ago the projected Washington appearance by South Vietnam's Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky at a right‐wing “March for Victory” rally brought pro tests from hawks as well as doves. The election‐eve trip was postponed only after the Nixon Administration's private remon strations were followed by Vice President Agnew's public warn ing that the visit would not “serve a useful purpose.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21 —American jet fighters equipped for high‐speed reconnaissance have been flying over North Vietnam almost daily in the two years since the bombing halt was announced.
SAIGON South Vietnam, Nov. 21 (UPI)—The Vietnamese have begun producing their own automobile. The jeep‐like veh icle, called the Dalat after a resort city in the Central High lands, is made in cooperation with Citroën of France.
American planes yesterday ended their one‐day bombing of North Vietnam. De fense Secretary Laird said the raids had been authorized to destroy antiaircraft in stallations that have been shooting at Amer ican reconnaissance planes, but there were strong indications that a principal aim was the destruction of war stocks. American officials disputed reports from North Viet nam that targets in the Hanoi‐Haiphong area, well north of the 19th parallel, had been hit. [Page 1, Columns 6‐8.]
HANOI, North Vietnam, Nov. 21—Hanoi shook today from the blast of bombs only 25 miles away as United States aircraft carried out raids start ing at 2:30 A.M.
FORT HOOD, TEX., Nov. 21 (UPI)—S. Sgt.David Mitchell, his right hand smoothing the two neat rows of medals clipped to his green wool Army tunic, said today he wanted to be a soldier for life.
The American bombing raids against North Vietnam this weekend must inevitably arouse concern both over the nature and the significance of the raids.

LONDON, Nov. 22—George Orwell could not have improved on Defense Secretary Laird's phrasing in the an nouncement of renewed American bombing in North Vietnam. There was not even any bombing in it—just “protective reaction strikes.” They had been made against “missile and anti aircraft gun sites and related facili ties” in response to “attacks on our unarmed reconnaissance planes.” It all sounded so clean and just. 
Indications mounted in Washington yes terday that a main reason for the weekend bombing of targets in North Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia was to block offensives ex pected throughout Indochina in the coming months. Administration officials said that they would not rule out similar air strikes at areas in Laos and Cambodia containing concentrations of enemy soldiers and sup plies. [Page 1, Column 8.] 
Senator Charles E. Goodell indicated yesterday that he might leave the Republican party if the Nixon Administra tion continues a, practice of “reading out” liberals from the G.O.P. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 22—The United States command has imposed an al most total blackout on infor mation about the American air raids against North Vietnam yesterday, including routine details normally made public after similar raids in the past. 

SAIGON, Nov. 22 (AP)— American bombers turned to targets in Laos and Cambodia today after major raids in North Vietnam. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 21— This is half‐time in the Nixon Administration, even though a weary Congress is still on the field, running out the clock on 1970. President Nixon, not un like the coach of a tiring squad, has withdrawn from partisan conflict to develop what is widely called a new game plan for the second half of his term, starting in January. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 22 — There were increasing indica tions today that the big United States air strikes against North Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia this weekend were ordered by President Nixon to deter the enemy from offensives through out Indochina in the coming months. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 23 — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird disclosed today that a small task force of Army and Air Force men landed about 23 miles west of Hanoi over the weekend in an unsuccessful at tempt to free American prison ers thought to be held at a camp there. 
There is now good reason to believe that the wide spread weekend air assault on North Vietnam repre sented an effort to block a new Communist build‐up South Vietnam through American air power and did not simply constitute a “protective reaction,” as billed. 
SAIGON, Nov. 23—American aerial warfare over Indochina resumed its normal course to day, with United States jet strikes reported against sus pected enemy positions in Cam bodia, Laos and South Vietnam, and reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam to assess the results of Saturday's raids. 
I want to give you now the details of the only opera tion that took place north of the 19th Parallel this past weekend. 

WASHINGTON, Nov. 23 — There is a single threat of con cern that binds together every one of President Nixon's spec tacular military ventures in Vietnam this year: his anxiety about the consequences of the American withdrawal. 
CHOISY‐LE‐ROI, France Nov. 23— North Vietnam and the Vietcong said today that they would not attend this Wednes day's scheduled session of the Vietnam peace talks to protest the American air attacks on North Vietnam last weekend. 
CHICAGO, Nov. 23—A Fed eral deputy marshal, Ronald Dobroski, testified today that he had taken a note from the Chicago conspiracy jury to Judge Julius J. Hoffman during the jury's deliberations and had been ordered by the judge to tell the jurors to continue their deliberations. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 23—A small Vietnamese girl in pajamas, who has no idea of what Dec. 25 means to others, is a sudden reminder of Christmas on a noisy Saigon street. 
MOSCOW. Nov. 23—The Soviet Union reacted official ly today to the latest Ameri can bombing raids over North Vietnam with a statement affirming support for Hanoi but avoiding direct involve ment. 

UNITED NATIONS. N. Y., Nov. 23—Secretary Thant to day said that American air strikes against North Vietnam over the weekend were “a dis turbing development.”
WASHINGTON, Nov. 23— Conversations with Administra tion officials suggest that the information the United States has on American prisoners of war in North Vietnam is lim ited and imprecise. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov 2.3 —Two key Government wit nesses at the murder trial of First Lieut. William L. Calley, Jr. stated under cross‐examina tion today that the decorations they received for rescuing chil dren during the alleged Mylai massacre were based on false citations. One of the two further said he was an occasional user of marijuana. 
Following are excerpts from the transcript of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's open hearing Washington yesterday on the rescue mission in North Vietnam as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of A.B.C. News. Among those questioning Secretory of Defense Melvin R. Laird were Senators J. W. Fulbright, Frank Church and Claiborne Pell, Democrats, and Georce Aiken. Republican. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 24 — Nguyen Cao Ky, South Viet nam's often controversial Vice President, pictured himself to day as a misunderstood mod erate, “an ex ‐ hawk turned dove,” whose primary interest is in ending the fighting that has wracked his country for 20 Years. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Nov. 24 (AP)—A helicopter carrying South Vietnamese troops col lided today with a light United States plane in the Mekong Delta 80 miles south of Saigon. 
CHICAGO, Nov. 24— Under persistent questioning by a de fense attorney, Deputy Federal Marshal Ronald Dobroski said today that the jury in the con spiracy trial of the Chicago Seven had sent only one dead lock message during five days of deliberations and this had been sent on Saturday, the day the deliberations began. 
As a sequel if not an answer to Channel 13's re cent controversial program on “Schoolhouse or Jail house,” the noncommercial outlet offered 90 minutes last night under the title of “Schools Can Work.” The value of the program was that it underscored the fact that in a complicated urban school system no one has a single pat answer to all the system's problems. Not prin cipals, Board of Education officials teachers, parents, students or bystanders. 
HONG KONG, Nov. 24—The Vietcong “shadow government” apparently has changed its name from the Provisional revo lutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam to the Government of the Re public of South Vietnam. 
SAN DIEGO, Nov. 24 (AP)— A young Navy officer who signed a petition to the Penta gon objecting to the war in Vietnam is getting his discharge by order of a Federal judge. 
STANFORD, Calif., Nov. 24 (AP)—Rock‐throwing demon strators broke 49 windows at Stanford University last night in a protest against the United States bombing of North Viet nam last weekend. 
PARIS—The peace negotiations in Paris have changed very little during the past eighteen months but the war in Indochina has. Nothing confirmed this fact more strikingly than last weekend's U. S. air raids on the North. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 24 — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that he would recommend to President Nixon the resumption of full‐scale air attacks on North Vietnam if the enemy engaged in major violations of a tacit understand ing with the United States that halted the bombing two years ago. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 24— A former helicopter gun ship pilot testified today that he saw Vietnamese civilians cut down by strafing as they streamed in paic out of Mylai 4 on the morning of the alleged “massacre,” March 16, 1968. 
ROME, Nov. 24— Vatican in formants said today that Pope Paul VI was planning to broad cast an appeal for a negotiated peace in Vietnam and Cam bodia when his plane passes over or near Indochina Friday. 
Two American lawyers who were in Hanoi during the Amer ican attempt last weekend to rescue prisoners of war said here yesterday that they had brought back letters from 320 of the known 339 prisoners. 
New Strategy in Vietnam
WASHINGTON, Nov. 25 — Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said today that the Nixon Administration disclosed the commando raid last Satur day on the empty prisoner‐of war camp in North Vietnam to avoid a “credibility problem” with the American public. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam Nov. 25 (AP)—The United States command said today that bomb ing by B25's and fighter‐bomb ers continued today against North Vietnamese supply routes in Laos and Cambodia and that reconnaissance operations were conducted over North Vietnam. 
The United States Court of Appeals here held yesterday that Walter G. Pietsch, of Rego Park, Queens, could not bring a court challenge to the right of Congress to authorize funds for the war in Vietnam just because he is a taxpayer. 
CHICAGO, Nov. 25 — Judge Julius J. Hoffman decided today that he needed more time to study the Chicago conspiracy trial record before placing into the appeal record his recollec tions of any communications he might have had with the jury.
International Defense Secretary Laird told the House Committee on Foreign Affairs yesterday that the Government had not “necessarily” planned to disclose the commando raid Fri day on an empty prisoner‐of‐war camp in North Vietnam. He said the news had been made public to avoid a “credibility prob lem” after North Vietnam had reported air raids near Hanoi. [Page 1, Column 5.] 

WASHINGTON, Nov. 25— The head of an antiwar group accused Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird today of hav ing distorted for political pur poses information on American prisoners in North Vietnam that the group has been pro viding. 
ROME, Nov. 25—Pope Paul VI, on the eve of the longest journey he has undertaken dur ing his pontificate, stressed again today that he would be traveling as a bishop, pastor, missionary and “fisher of men.” 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 25 (AP) —Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam met today with some of the United States Senate's harshest critics of the Vietnam ,war and of the Saigon Government. 
HONG KONG, Thursday, Nov. 26 (AP)—North Vietnam charged today that United States war planes killed at least 49 North Vietnamese civilians —including 28 in one restaurant and six in a hospital—during the air raids last Saturday. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 25— The planners of the comman do raid on a North Vietnam ese prison camp last weekend had to take into account the position of the moon and So viet satellites and to gather men from all over the world. 
FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 25 (UPI) — A group of Repre sentatives urged today that secret Congressional testimony concerning the alleged Mylai 4 massacre be turned over to the Fort Benning military tri bunal hearing the court martial of First Lieut William L. Calley Jr. 
UNITED NATIONS, N. Y., Nov. 25 — Secretary General Thant renewed his appeal to North Vietnam today to permit the Red Cross or other appro priate humanitarian organiza tions to see American war pris oners. He made a similar plea last February.
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Thursday, Nov. 26 (AP) — The Navy canceled this morn ing a planned visit by news men to aircraft carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin. 
TOKYO, Nov. 25 (AP) — Miss Barbara Bye of Brooklyn, who has been confined to her hotel room at Tokyo's Haneda Airport for 26 days because immigration authorities sought to prevent her entry, may not be deported summarily, the Tokyo. Appellate Court ruled today. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 25 (AP) —A nationwide drive is under way to collect 100 tons of mail for a Christmas display of con cern for missing and captive United States servicemen in Southeast Asia. 
BANGUI, Central African Re public. Nov. 26 (AP)— Until last week, 17‐year‐old Martine sold cigarettes on the streets of Saigon in South Vietnam and lived in a shack built with flat tened beer cans. Today, she is the daughter of a President and riding in a limousine. 
MANILA, Friday, Nov. 27—A 35‐year‐old Bolivan who identi fied himself as a surrealist painter and a foe of hypocrisy and superstition hurled himself, brandishing a knife, toward Pope Paul VI at Manila Air port this morning. The Pope was unhurt and apparently un touched. 


Nowhere has air power failed so significantly to win a war as in Viet nam. Not only has air power failed to win here, it has failed, at great cost, to accomplish its most specific missions: to interdict enemy supply lines, to weaken the enemy's capac ity and will to resist. 
PARIS, Nov. 26—North Viet nam continued to insist today that American bombers ranged far north of the 19th Parallel last Saturday and Sunday, and a spokesman here said that 49 civilians had died in the raids and 40 had been wounded. The Hanoi radio gave the same fig ures in a broadcast earlier today. 
ANCHORAGE, Nov. 27 — A DC‐8 jetliner carrying 229 per sons, most of them military per sonnel bound for Vietnam, crashed and exploded during take‐off tonight, killing 45 per sons. 
A Queens man whose chal lenge to the constitutionality of the war in Vietnam was re jected Wednesday by the United States Court of Appeals said yesterday he planned to carry his case to the Supreme Court. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 27 — A militant antiwar group led by two Roman Catholic priests is plotting to kidnap a White House aide or other public of ficial, J. Edgar Hoover, direc tor of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said today. 
 


TOKYO, Nov. 28— The United States is contemplating a major reduction of its forces in Japan, partly for budgetary reasons and partly to carry out President Nixon's policy of reducing American military in volvement in Asia, informed sources said here today. 

WASHINGTON — After months of seeming quiescence in Vietnam, the news last week of new bombing raids and a derring‐do attempt to rescue prisoners of war in the North raised once again a question that is too often forgotten. Where is Vietnamization taking us? 
MANILA, Sunday, Nov. 29— Pope Paul VI in a broadcast “message to Asia” today warned the continent against what he termed militant and aggressive atheism. 

The leading participants in the American raid Nov. 21 on an American prisoner‐of‐war camp near Hanoi were honored yesterday during half‐time cere monies at the Army‐Navy game in Philadelphia. 
MANILA, Nov. 28—A few hours after the attempt on the life of Pope Paul VI by a dagger‐wielding Bolivian at Manila airport yesterday, mes sages of good wishes for the Pontiff started flowing in here from kings, presidents, religious leaders and private admirers all over the world. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Sunday, Nov. 29 (AP) — A United States Air Force trans port carrying 73 South Viet namese and six American crewmen has been missing for three days, the U.S. com mand said today.
 
STOCKHOLM, Nov. 28— The bombing of North Vietnam last weekend was condemned as “a new U.S. crime of aggression” at a world conference on Viet nam, Laos and Cambodia that opened here today. 
TODAY SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 29
Secretary of Defense Laird says the Administration decided to publicize the commando raid on an empty prisoner‐of‐war camp near Hanoi because of “a certain problem of credibility in our society.” But nearly every thing connected with this brilliantly executed but none theless abortive mission—especially the official explana tions and claims for it—is likely to widen that home‐front credibility gap. 
WASHINGTON — Except for the outcome, it was as Ameri can as John Wayne. President Nixon preferred the metaphor of football, meaning that when you're in trouble you aim for surprise; players call it going for the long one, throwing the bomb. 
SAIGON, South Vietnam, Monday, Nov. 30 (AP)—United States‐South Vietnamese raid ing party attacked a Vietcong prison camp in a bamboo grove in South Vietnam's Mekong Delta and freed 19 Vietnamese, the United States Navy an nounced today. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 29 — Senator J. W. Fulbright charged today that the Defense Department had displaced the State Department as the pri mary formulator of American foreign policy, particularly in Southeast Asia. 
WASHINGTON, Nov. 29—The wide publicity given the daring but fruitless attempt to free American prisoners in North Vietnam has virtually sub merged the questions of whether that raid — and the massive American bombing that coin cided with it—violated Presi dent Johnson's understanding with Hanoi about ending the bomb ing of the North. Privately, officials in the Nixon Ad ministration mar vel at the ability of Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird to divert public attention from that issue and to put senatorial critics of the bombing on the defensive. 
MOSCOW, Nov. 29—Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Soviet Communist party, expressed optimism today about the chances for a Middle East settlement and for a Big Four accord on Berlin. 
Re‐escalating the Vietnam War
